[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Before we move on with this episode of the scene in the unseen do check out another awesome podcast from IVM podcast
[Amit Varma]: Cyrus says hosted by my old buddy Cyrus brocha
[Amit Varma]: Mary Pia, oh Mary Pia gaye rangoon kiya hai wahan se telephone
[Amit Varma]: tumhari yaad satati hai
[Amit Varma]: jiya mein aag lagati hai
[Amit Varma]: hum chhor ke hindustan bahut pashtay
[Amit Varma]: bahut pashtay
[Amit Varma]: hui bhool jo tumko saath na lekar aaye
[Amit Varma]: hum Burma ki galiyon mein aur tum ho Dehradun
[Amit Varma]: tumhari yaad satati hai
[Amit Varma]: jiya mein aag lagati hai
[Unknown]: welcome to the scene and the unseen
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science
[Amit Varma]: please welcome your host Amit Bhadwa
[Amit Varma]: welcome to the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: I'm a migrant but I wouldn't be able to tell you exactly where I am from
[Amit Varma]: my father was born in Lahore in 1941
[Amit Varma]: and moved with partition to Bengal and grew up in Calcutta
[Amit Varma]: there he met my mother, a Bengali and married her
[Amit Varma]: after a scandalous love affair that was a talk of the town
[Amit Varma]: I was a product of this marriage between Punjab and Bengal
[Amit Varma]: and was born in Chandigarh but spoke Bengali at home and ate fish everyday
[Amit Varma]: I went to college in Pune and have lived in Mumbai for the last 24 years
[Amit Varma]: where am I from? I can't quite say
[Amit Varma]: but I'm an Indian and like all Indians at some level or another
[Amit Varma]: I am a migrant
[Amit Varma]: my guest today is Chinmay Tumbe
[Amit Varma]: who teaches at IIM Ahmedabad
[Amit Varma]: and is the author of a marvellous book called India Moving
[Amit Varma]: India Moving is a history of a country on the move
[Amit Varma]: it documents migrations out of India, into India and within India
[Amit Varma]: and tells a story of a society that has always been in flux
[Amit Varma]: it's a riveting read as a book of history
[Amit Varma]: and it also carries much sociological insight
[Amit Varma]: into what makes us what we are
[Amit Varma]: a nation shaped and defined by its diversity
[Amit Varma]: before we get to the conversation though
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love
[Amit Varma]: the book I want to recommend today is by an author who is an Indian favourite
[Amit Varma]: certainly of my generation when we were growing up
[Amit Varma]: it's P.G. Woodhouse
[Amit Varma]: and the name of the book is My Man Jeeves
[Amit Varma]: but there are plenty of other books by him on Storytel
[Amit Varma]: and remember you get a 30 day free trial only at storytel.com slash IVM
[Amit Varma]: Chinmay welcome to the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: thanks
[Amit Varma]: so before we kind of start talking about your book
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about yourself
[Amit Varma]: I mean you've written a book on migration
[Amit Varma]: are you a sort of migrant yourself?
[Guest]: yeah like pretty much everyone in this city
[Guest]: pretty much everyone in India
[Guest]: I think you know migration has hugely influenced my sort of education and career path
[Guest]: started off in a boarding school
[Guest]: so you can say I started off you know moving at a very young age
[Guest]: and I've been pretty much I think in the last six years
[Guest]: I moved five different cities
[Guest]: so I've definitely been much more you know on the move
[Guest]: and that kind of reflects I guess in the book
[Guest]: and you were trained as a political scientist?
[Guest]: no trained as an economist
[Guest]: but I wrote my PhD on migration history
[Guest]: but it's sort of the economic impact of migration
[Guest]: and this book in a way is
[Guest]: after that I did a lot of other research
[Guest]: and this book is in a way culmination of about 10 years of research
[Amit Varma]: starting with my PhD
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things that struck me while reading this book is
[Amit Varma]: you know I've done a number of episodes with historians
[Amit Varma]: like Ram Guha, Srinath Raghavan, Manu Pillay
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things that struck me reading this book is
[Amit Varma]: that this is really a fairly deeply researched book of history
[Amit Varma]: as well, was that a sort of skill that you had to train yourself in
[Amit Varma]: given that you were trained in economics before this?
[Guest]: absolutely, completely self-trained
[Guest]: I've never taken a course in history after my class 10
[Guest]: so history is all about reading a lot
[Guest]: I spent a year and a half in the US as a house husband
[Guest]: I just read a lot
[Guest]: and so I think that really trained me into
[Guest]: you know reading the core aspect
[Guest]: of course most of my reading is in economic history
[Guest]: migration of course is linked heavily into that
[Guest]: and then I got an opportunity to start teaching history
[Guest]: at IIM Ahmedabad where I moved in 2016
[Guest]: and in fact this year we'll be organising a conference on history at IIMA
[Guest]: so I'm definitely into this field of business economic history
[Guest]: and migration is a lovely subject
[Guest]: because you can look at it from practically every discipline
[Guest]: whether it's law or sociology or economics and so on
[Guest]: and so my PhD thesis was fairly interdisciplinary
[Guest]: and so I thought okay I should just extend that
[Guest]: so though I didn't have a background in history
[Guest]: I think this reading over the last 10 years
[Guest]: and then professionally going to different conferences
[Guest]: and just meeting different people
[Guest]: has helped tremendously in sort of shaping my thoughts
[Guest]: when I was studying in London
[Guest]: they had a department of economics which I was part of
[Guest]: but I used to audit the courses in the department of economic history
[Guest]: probably the only university in the world, LSE
[Guest]: which has a specialised department of economic history
[Guest]: so I think that's where the interest really got seeded
[Guest]: and since then I read something on history every day
[Guest]: and you're right this book is heavily heavily researched
[Guest]: it cites I think more than 500 studies
[Guest]: and it's been a lot of fun
[Guest]: because a lot of the challenge is to get this in an accessible way
[Guest]: and you know this book I thought
[Guest]: there should be at least some book which brings out this rich history
[Amit Varma]: and does the quality of your reading change
[Amit Varma]: when you know you're writing a book like this
[Amit Varma]: and let's say you're reading partly for pleasure
[Amit Varma]: because obviously you love the subject
[Amit Varma]: but also you're reading to gather in all the information
[Amit Varma]: does it change the way you read?
[Amit Varma]: Do you stop more often to take notes
[Amit Varma]: or to you know look at the bibliography
[Amit Varma]: and get those other books?
[Amit Varma]: How does it work?
[Guest]: Yeah I mean I think this is
[Guest]: I call this a semi-academic book
[Guest]: so it's got the academic stuff
[Guest]: but it's also written for the general audience
[Guest]: and so the more challenging part
[Guest]: I think the academic stuff is simpler
[Guest]: in the sense you get some books
[Guest]: you know you make some notes and that's fine
[Guest]: but it's really how do you intersperse popular culture
[Guest]: how do you get the sort of really day-to-day anecdotes
[Guest]: conversations into the book
[Guest]: and there's so much that one can get in a book on migration
[Guest]: but one has to be really selective
[Guest]: and so that has you know
[Guest]: that's I think taken more time
[Guest]: in passing through a variety of things
[Guest]: for example songs
[Guest]: there's so many songs on migration
[Amit Varma]: but I've chosen some which I thought you know
[Amit Varma]: exactly
[Guest]: so I thought that was an iconic song of migration
[Guest]: and it's really worked
[Guest]: because I actually asked around
[Guest]: I chose a few songs
[Guest]: and then this song seemed to be
[Guest]: of course it was apt
[Guest]: because I was talking about Burma in that chapter
[Guest]: but that song it's incredible
[Guest]: the resonance I received
[Guest]: people across India have said you know
[Guest]: that song is
[Guest]: or they've just flipped through the book
[Guest]: and bought the book because this song
[Guest]: it's on that particular quote
[Amit Varma]: and it's really resonant at multiple levels
[Amit Varma]: because a lot of the questions I'm going to ask you later
[Amit Varma]: can easily you know go back to that song
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that it sort of shows the loneliness
[Amit Varma]: and the longing you feel for a loved one
[Amit Varma]: it also sort of is almost a commentary on gender
[Amit Varma]: in the sense it's a wife who's left back
[Amit Varma]: and it's a husband who's gone
[Amit Varma]: and also to me it never really struck me
[Amit Varma]: because I'm born in a generation as are you
[Amit Varma]: where Indians don't really migrate to Rangoon anymore
[Amit Varma]: and reading your book in that sense
[Amit Varma]: was a revelation in terms of figuring out
[Amit Varma]: that you know Burma was such a huge source of Indian migration
[Guest]: yeah absolutely I mean Burma
[Guest]: for the east coast
[Guest]: it was like what today the Persian Gulf is for the west coast
[Guest]: Rangoon 100 years back is what we see Dubai today
[Guest]: it's almost like a mirror image 100 years back and today
[Guest]: and you know people
[Guest]: even if you look at the city of Mumbai
[Guest]: I mean the diamond dealers like Ketan Mehta
[Guest]: after his wife this Leelavati hospital is built
[Guest]: Ketan Mehta started off in Burma
[Guest]: and then you know a lot of people had to leave Burma eventually
[Guest]: so a lot of capital was there in Burma
[Guest]: different communities
[Guest]: I mean of course a lot of people are jailed as well
[Guest]: Burma had a famous jail tilak most famously was there
[Guest]: and let's not forget that the last king of Burma himself
[Guest]: was exiled in Ratnagiri which is not too far from here
[Amit Varma]: in fact you point out the very interesting parallel
[Amit Varma]: that you know tilak was a migrant from Ratnagiri
[Amit Varma]: and when he was jailed in Burma
[Guest]: the king of Burma was jailed in Ratnagiri
[Guest]: yeah absolutely at the same time
[Amit Varma]: yeah that's pretty wild
[Amit Varma]: getting to your book
[Amit Varma]: you begin by pointing out that there are traditionally
[Amit Varma]: two routes to diversity
[Amit Varma]: which are basically
[Amit Varma]: one is through migration
[Amit Varma]: and the other is through isolation
[Amit Varma]: and the lack of migration
[Amit Varma]: and you point out that there's often been a misconception
[Amit Varma]: about what makes India so diverse
[Amit Varma]: and that is one sort and not the other
[Guest]: can you elaborate?
[Guest]: yeah I mean
[Guest]: you know if you look at languages for example
[Guest]: we feel that we're very proud that India is such a diverse country
[Guest]: but actually there's some
[Guest]: like there's Papua New Guinea
[Guest]: which has more languages than India
[Guest]: and that's because the islands never talked to each other
[Guest]: they didn't have the sort of technology to bridge that
[Guest]: so the question is you know
[Guest]: in India we know for a fact
[Guest]: that communities are very isolated
[Guest]: in the sense even today
[Guest]: inter-community marriages are very
[Guest]: practically non-existent
[Guest]: as per some survey
[Guest]: the India Human Development Survey
[Guest]: large nationally representative survey
[Guest]: something like 94% of Indians still marry
[Guest]: within their own castes and communities
[Guest]: so this is a very highly endogamous society
[Guest]: but what's interesting is
[Guest]: even though people are marrying within their groups
[Guest]: they're still moving
[Guest]: and in that process
[Guest]: there's a transfer of language, culture, customs
[Guest]: so what I argue is
[Guest]: I mean is this
[Guest]: what I ask is that
[Guest]: is it the case that all these communities
[Guest]: were sitting isolated
[Guest]: and you know bang
[Guest]: you have the British coming
[Guest]: and then you have independence
[Guest]: and then they've been forged into a common nation
[Guest]: and what I find is actually that
[Guest]: people have been on the move
[Guest]: whether it's for
[Guest]: and not just for pilgrimage
[Guest]: they've been moving for work
[Guest]: they've been moving for a variety of reasons
[Guest]: and the most fundamental form of migration
[Guest]: of course is marriage
[Guest]: and more women have moved
[Guest]: permanently in India than men
[Guest]: for marriage
[Guest]: and it's not necessarily just the neighboring village
[Guest]: so they also go
[Guest]: you know at least 100 kilometers
[Guest]: many paths
[Guest]: and because it's strong sun preference in some parts
[Guest]: women are moving
[Guest]: more than 100 kilometers in many places
[Guest]: and it's actually these small small migrations
[Guest]: which at the margin
[Guest]: are spreading or diffusing different cultures
[Guest]: especially when you see linguistic overlap
[Guest]: so where does a Kannada speaking boundary end
[Guest]: and where does a Marathi speaker
[Guest]: or where does a Telugu speaker start
[Guest]: these sort of
[Guest]: these marginal linguistic boundaries
[Guest]: are in a way sort of
[Guest]: you know massaged through these marriage migrations
[Guest]: because it's the woman of the household
[Guest]: who often marries into a different linguistic background
[Guest]: same caste but different linguistic
[Guest]: and she learns the language
[Guest]: and so this is a sort of bridge
[Guest]: it's a very subtle bridge
[Guest]: nobody sees this as migration
[Guest]: but it's actually these millions of women migrations
[Guest]: on almost a day to day basis
[Guest]: that actually what I argue is
[Guest]: the invisible threads
[Guest]: that hold India's diversity
[Guest]: to paraphrase Nehru
[Amit Varma]: and I guess along with the languages
[Amit Varma]: it's also an intermingling of other parts of culture
[Amit Varma]: like our cuisines
[Amit Varma]: absolutely
[Amit Varma]: you know all of which is a melting pot
[Amit Varma]: I mean I'll come back to caste later
[Amit Varma]: because you've got a lot of insights on that
[Amit Varma]: in your book
[Amit Varma]: and what you just kind of said about endogamy
[Amit Varma]: reminded me of a quote from David Reich's book
[Amit Varma]: Who We Are and How We Got Here
[Amit Varma]: where he speaks about how
[Amit Varma]: India is not really one large population
[Amit Varma]: in his words
[Amit Varma]: the Han Chinese would be one large population
[Amit Varma]: India is really a collection of many many many small populations
[Amit Varma]: because of the caste system
[Amit Varma]: over the last 2000 years
[Amit Varma]: there's been very little intermarriage
[Amit Varma]: but as you're pointing out
[Amit Varma]: that doesn't mean that there hasn't been intermingling of cultures
[Amit Varma]: there has been a whole amount
[Amit Varma]: and a lot of that is
[Amit Varma]: because of migration
[Amit Varma]: now about 3 months back
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Tony Joseph
[Amit Varma]: on his book The Early Indians
[Amit Varma]: which is also I guess in a sense about migration
[Amit Varma]: absolutely
[Amit Varma]: but that kind of covers early India
[Amit Varma]: so you get a sense of
[Amit Varma]: ok you know
[Amit Varma]: there was a migration out of Africa
[Amit Varma]: and then
[Amit Varma]: there was the Indus Valley Civilization
[Amit Varma]: which was the early Indians
[Amit Varma]: and the sort of estations
[Amit Varma]: and then later you have the Aryan Migration
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: and that's kind of where his book leaves off
[Amit Varma]: having covered that part
[Amit Varma]: and you sort of mentioned that briefly in your first chapter
[Amit Varma]: but you know then you sort of go on to talk about
[Amit Varma]: how forces like geography and the weather
[Amit Varma]: shaped migration from that part on
[Amit Varma]: and particularly how the Indo-Gangetic Plane
[Amit Varma]: which is a sort of a hub and spoke
[Amit Varma]: of all the migrations that have been happening here
[Amit Varma]: which now contains 10% of the world's population
[Amit Varma]: how the center kind of shifted there
[Amit Varma]: can you talk a bit about that?
[Guest]: Yeah, we still don't know exactly
[Guest]: how or when this center shifted
[Guest]: from the Indus Valley to Bihar
[Guest]: but as I say
[Guest]: two of the most famous migrants
[Guest]: arguably are Buddha and Mahavir
[Guest]: both associated with Bihar
[Guest]: not necessarily born there
[Guest]: and what's fascinating for me is that
[Guest]: today Bihar is the epitome of out-migration
[Guest]: whereas 2000 years back
[Guest]: it was arguably you know
[Guest]: the sort of Asia's number one hotbed for in-migration
[Guest]: you had students visiting Nalanda University
[Guest]: from far and so on
[Guest]: so this is a really rich culture
[Guest]: it's very dense
[Guest]: which it is even today
[Guest]: and it's a culture which is kind of
[Guest]: you know probably relatively much richer
[Guest]: than the rest
[Guest]: and it's gone into relative decline
[Guest]: over several centuries
[Guest]: these migrations have happened through
[Guest]: multiple kinds
[Guest]: one of course is through the wandering ascetic
[Guest]: so that's the pilgrimage
[Guest]: and you know variety of forms
[Guest]: but there's a particular social group
[Guest]: called the Brahmanas
[Guest]: which in the first millennium is very important
[Guest]: and in a way you can't understand
[Guest]: the spread of Hindu thought
[Guest]: Hindu philosophy consolidation
[Guest]: without understanding the travels of Shankaracharya
[Guest]: or understanding even the geography
[Guest]: of the Indian subcontinent
[Guest]: where you have these four martyrs
[Guest]: placed in four different corners
[Guest]: they kind of map out the geography
[Guest]: and this is important because actually
[Guest]: we don't have good records of maps
[Guest]: before the arrival of the Europeans
[Guest]: actually no record
[Guest]: that we visually mapped out spaces
[Guest]: but clearly we were very good with directions
[Guest]: and we knew you know
[Guest]: how to get from one place to the other
[Guest]: so this migration of the social group
[Guest]: Brahmana is very interesting
[Guest]: because they were given orders by the king
[Guest]: to go and settle down
[Guest]: and collect taxes from people
[Guest]: and so this is the first real record
[Guest]: that we have of migration
[Guest]: that comes in the first millennium
[Guest]: now you can argue that
[Guest]: almost every war required some migration
[Guest]: marriage would require some migration
[Guest]: but something which is mentioned
[Guest]: clearly in the scriptures
[Guest]: as to so and so move from here to here
[Guest]: comes from this migration
[Guest]: of this particular social group
[Guest]: and I would argue that
[Guest]: this is very important to understand
[Guest]: how Hindu sort of thought
[Guest]: really consolidated in the subcontinent
[Guest]: because we think today that
[Guest]: you know Hinduism is for example
[Guest]: the default
[Guest]: but in the first millennium
[Guest]: there were actually various philosophical thoughts
[Guest]: we could have been a completely Jain country
[Guest]: we could have been a completely Buddhist country
[Guest]: but ultimately as we say
[Guest]: about 70% or 80% of the subcontinent today
[Guest]: is Hindu
[Guest]: and these migrations were important
[Guest]: to consolidate
[Amit Varma]: and were these migrations of the Brahmanas
[Amit Varma]: purposeful in that sense
[Amit Varma]: that you know
[Amit Varma]: a sort of a religious colonialism
[Amit Varma]: that we want to spread Hinduism
[Amit Varma]: and this is how we do it
[Amit Varma]: was it kind of purposeful in that way?
[Guest]: I don't think we have enough evidence of that
[Guest]: but clearly these were
[Guest]: you can call it land-based colonialism
[Guest]: in the sense that
[Guest]: they were given villages
[Guest]: to sort of maintain
[Guest]: collect taxes
[Guest]: and of course send the taxes back
[Guest]: so we know that you know
[Guest]: there's a relationship between
[Guest]: where the people are going
[Guest]: and the sort of metropole
[Guest]: and you have numerous inscriptions
[Guest]: there are many books written on this
[Guest]: but especially Orissa
[Guest]: I mean if you ask
[Guest]: you know why does Orissa have
[Guest]: so many of these temples
[Guest]: and centers which came
[Guest]: and you find a lot of these inscriptions
[Guest]: suggest that
[Guest]: there was this massive migration
[Guest]: towards Orissa
[Guest]: sometime in this first millennium
[Guest]: these are the stray references
[Guest]: to migration
[Guest]: they are the outsiders
[Guest]: so for example
[Guest]: even Alexander's armies
[Guest]: there's references to Indians
[Guest]: being taken back
[Guest]: to Europe as soldiers and so on
[Guest]: and when I was doing research
[Guest]: on this period
[Guest]: I found it's very interesting
[Guest]: because you never really think
[Guest]: of Indians being in Europe
[Guest]: 2000 years back
[Guest]: but apparently some of them were
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: maybe a handful
[Guest]: but there are actually references to that
[Amit Varma]: in fact you've got a reference
[Amit Varma]: somewhere in your book
[Amit Varma]: if I remember correctly
[Amit Varma]: to 15,000 people in Armenia
[Amit Varma]: yes
[Amit Varma]: which was pretty wild
[Amit Varma]: because I'd be like
[Amit Varma]: are there 15,000 Indians
[Amit Varma]: in Armenia today?
[Guest]: No, I doubt it
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: and it's one of those mysteries
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: it's always tough
[Guest]: to understand exact numbers
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: this is one of those
[Guest]: loose ends
[Guest]: where we
[Guest]: there's some evidence
[Guest]: that people were there
[Guest]: but we don't know
[Guest]: what happened after
[Guest]: so they were either wiped out
[Guest]: or they got completely assimilated
[Guest]: or converted
[Guest]: we don't know
[Guest]: and there are a lot of stories
[Guest]: you know like that
[Guest]: fascinating stories of course
[Guest]: of the Romas
[Guest]: of the gypsies in Europe
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: now there's genetic evidence
[Guest]: which suggests that they
[Guest]: sort of went out of
[Guest]: Northwest India
[Guest]: but interestingly
[Guest]: they were just not
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: Northwest Punjabis so to speak
[Guest]: but they belong to the
[Guest]: low-ranking castes
[Guest]: so the genetic studies map out
[Guest]: very closely with
[Guest]: particular castes
[Guest]: and them
[Guest]: so it's very interesting
[Guest]: as to how
[Guest]: different social groups
[Guest]: have had different sort of
[Guest]: types of
[Guest]: patterns of mobility
[Guest]: throughout history
[Guest]: and that's an important theme
[Guest]: of this book
[Amit Varma]: trajectories
[Amit Varma]: and you know
[Amit Varma]: you write elsewhere in your book
[Amit Varma]: that migration
[Amit Varma]: is one way
[Amit Varma]: of resistance
[Amit Varma]: against oppression
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: it's like the political scientist
[Amit Varma]: Theo Hirschman said
[Amit Varma]: that if you don't like
[Amit Varma]: the regime you're in
[Amit Varma]: you can either
[Amit Varma]: leave, complain or comply
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: migration is a common way
[Amit Varma]: people just leave
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: one maybe doesn't know
[Amit Varma]: the historical circumstances
[Amit Varma]: but the fact that
[Amit Varma]: it's
[Amit Varma]: lower castes
[Amit Varma]: who
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: who migrated in this instance
[Amit Varma]: is
[Amit Varma]: telling in a way
[Amit Varma]: it's very interesting that
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: given that
[Amit Varma]: India is basically
[Amit Varma]: not just composed of
[Amit Varma]: but
[Amit Varma]: populated by
[Amit Varma]: migration
[Amit Varma]: it's interesting that
[Amit Varma]: for a long time
[Amit Varma]: we had
[Amit Varma]: a negative attitude
[Amit Varma]: towards out-migration
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: we would call outsiders
[Amit Varma]: as you write in your book
[Amit Varma]: the Mlecchas
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: there would be these myths
[Amit Varma]: about how you lose
[Amit Varma]: your caste
[Amit Varma]: if you cross the
[Amit Varma]: Kalapani
[Amit Varma]: and so on
[Amit Varma]: I mean I remember
[Amit Varma]: reading Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: biography also
[Amit Varma]: where
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi was
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: for a while
[Amit Varma]: ostracized by his
[Amit Varma]: family
[Amit Varma]: and so on
[Guest]: that's kind of
[Guest]: curious isn't it
[Guest]: for
[Guest]: Absolutely
[Guest]: I mean when I started
[Guest]: writing this book
[Guest]: actually
[Guest]: because I do
[Guest]: most of my
[Guest]: historical work
[Guest]: in the last
[Guest]: 200 years
[Guest]: and so it's very
[Guest]: challenging to
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: understand
[Guest]: the past before that
[Guest]: and I assumed
[Guest]: that you know
[Guest]: the passport
[Guest]: really was a
[Guest]: major instrument
[Guest]: devised in the
[Guest]: early 20th century
[Guest]: which curtailed
[Guest]: mobility
[Guest]: but as I
[Guest]: said
[Guest]: everyone could
[Guest]: move
[Guest]: anyhow
[Guest]: they felt like
[Guest]: so in the
[Guest]: Arthashastra
[Guest]: you have clear
[Guest]: references of
[Guest]: like a passport
[Guest]: spies
[Guest]: or like control
[Guest]: officers in
[Guest]: kingdoms
[Guest]: so it's not
[Guest]: the case that
[Guest]: you could just
[Guest]: pick up your
[Guest]: bag and go
[Guest]: anywhere
[Guest]: unless it's
[Guest]: a pilgrimage
[Guest]: it's also
[Guest]: unsafe
[Guest]: and so on
[Guest]: but the
[Guest]: social norm
[Guest]: as you said
[Guest]: has been so
[Guest]: much so that
[Guest]: about 15
[Guest]: years back
[Guest]: there was a
[Guest]: temple priest
[Guest]: fight in
[Guest]: Udupi
[Guest]: and one
[Guest]: priest actually
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: tried to
[Guest]: pull the
[Guest]: other down
[Guest]: by saying
[Guest]: this fellow
[Guest]: actually went
[Guest]: to the
[Guest]: US
[Guest]: so it was
[Guest]: a notion
[Guest]: alive even
[Guest]: in the
[Guest]: 21st century
[Guest]: this idea
[Guest]: of the
[Guest]: Kalapani
[Guest]: but as I
[Guest]: argue in
[Guest]: the 19th
[Guest]: century
[Guest]: the idea
[Guest]: that you
[Guest]: could lose
[Guest]: your caste
[Guest]: actually became
[Guest]: very attractive
[Guest]: and so
[Guest]: while a lot
[Guest]: of the
[Guest]: literature
[Guest]: actually sees
[Guest]: indentured
[Guest]: migrations as
[Guest]: exploitation
[Guest]: I would see
[Guest]: that a lot
[Guest]: of it was
[Guest]: exploitation
[Guest]: but a lot
[Guest]: of it was
[Guest]: also driven
[Guest]: by people
[Guest]: who wanted
[Guest]: to leave
[Guest]: because they
[Guest]: wanted a
[Guest]: better future
[Guest]: it's not
[Amit Varma]: a simple
[Amit Varma]: idea
[Amit Varma]: but
[Amit Varma]: people
[Amit Varma]: who
[Amit Varma]: actually
[Amit Varma]: wanted to
[Amit Varma]: leave
[Amit Varma]: the
[Amit Varma]: country
[Amit Varma]: were
[Amit Varma]: also
[Amit Varma]: suffering
[Amit Varma]: from
[Amit Varma]: these
[Amit Varma]: kinds
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: migrations
[Amit Varma]: they were
[Amit Varma]: choosing
[Amit Varma]: it in
[Amit Varma]: contrast
[Amit Varma]: to
[Amit Varma]: something
[Amit Varma]: even
[Guest]: worse
[Guest]: you do
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: lots
[Guest]: that Delhi becomes a major power center. But most importantly, for the first time Delhi is connected
[Guest]: to both figuratively, you know, the East Coast and the West Coast. So this opens tremendous
[Guest]: opportunities of maritime trade, merging with inland trade. So till then it was always separate.
[Guest]: You also had urbanization in the sense a lot of large cities coming up of Delhi, but also by the
[Guest]: end of the period Surat and so on, as a result of which a lot of people started moving to these
[Guest]: places. And finally, there's also pilgrimage networks, which started and you had different
[Guest]: religious, not maybe faiths, but philosophies. So you have the Sufi wanderers, then you have the
[Guest]: sort of Vaishnav, Pushti Margi Vaishnavism, which is a new form of philosophical thought,
[Guest]: which emerges. You have this Sikhism emerges, a religion. And all of these, I argue, actually,
[Guest]: a lot of these religions had a much more benevolent outlook towards not only trade,
[Guest]: but also migration. And so they weren't less taboos of sort of moving in many philosophies.
[Guest]: So arguably, the pace of mobility increased. Note also, there's time of a lot of warfare.
[Guest]: And so there's what economists would call as a military labor market. And this is different
[Guest]: because you have full time warriors. But when the size of the army grows, you also need to
[Guest]: have part time warriors. And so you also have like agriculturalists coming into warfare.
[Guest]: And many of the dominant, you know, sort of warfare, warrior groups of India, consolidated
[Guest]: themselves in this period, like the Rajputs and the Marathas, for example. And this is important
[Guest]: because some of these mobility streams continued well into the recent past, that is, we're talking
[Guest]: 200 years earlier. So there's some districts of India, which supplied the soldiers, you know,
[Guest]: in Saran, for example, in Bihar, supplied the soldiers to the Shersa Suri army, then the Mughal
[Guest]: armies, then the British, the Bengal native infantry, and then much later to the industrial
[Guest]: sort of mills of Calcutta. So the same region, sending out people, and that becomes a sort of
[Guest]: pattern for many parts. So the development of a military labor market in this medieval time,
[Guest]: city building, which became very big, and this integration of inland trade with overland and
[Guest]: overseas trade. So these sort of three major factors really boosted mobility in a big.
[Guest]: Note that the speed didn't change much, essentially, for until the advent of the railways,
[Guest]: the speed of the horse was the constraint. But because of this demand for variety of
[Guest]: economic sort of needs, mobility increased tremendously.
[Amit Varma]: No, I find it really intriguing the way you sort of describe the military labor market.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like there's a gig economy and you can just turn on an Uber for warriors and figure
[Amit Varma]: out which is the most profitable war for you to go to. Another thing that struck me is very
[Amit Varma]: interesting, and I hadn't really thought about it in this way before, was that a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: urbanization, like you point out in South India was temple generated urbanization, you know,
[Amit Varma]: benefiting merchants and artisans, whereas typically we today we think of urbanization
[Amit Varma]: as driven by economic imperatives, you want to form larger economic networks and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, religion being a force in both urbanization and migration was really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: What I also found fascinating was your whole account of slavery. Like, typically, when we
[Amit Varma]: talk about slavery, we obviously imagine the American South and the Civil War and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. But India was a market for slaves in both directions. Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, slavery has been mentioned since the times of the Arthashastra, maybe even before.
[Guest]: Different types of slaves, we are accustomed to thinking of slaves usually as men,
[Guest]: but in Indian history also a lot of accounts of female slavery, whether it's in the Chola Empire,
[Guest]: the Rajputs, the Mughals. So women slaves have always been there. In this time period,
[Guest]: for roughly 15 to 18th century, especially when in the US and South America and North America,
[Guest]: this transatlantic slave trade really began. India really, you know, developed two or three
[Guest]: major circuits. One was from Africa to India via Arabia. And the most fascinating community,
[Guest]: which exists till date, is the Siddhi community, who trace the ancestry to this sort of group.
[Guest]: There's a famous guy called Mallik Ambar, who becomes this big noble in the Ahmednagar dynasty.
[Guest]: And he comes from Ethiopia to Arabia to what we would call as Maharashtra today.
[Guest]: And he comes as a slave, and he rises up to be a fairly rich man with a lot of power.
[Guest]: And Jahangir hates him because he's, you know, thwarting the Mughal attack in the Deccan.
[Guest]: And his descendants, you know, I mean, the community has a huge setback.
[Guest]: The slave imports stop after they sort of lose wars. But the community still exists today.
[Guest]: And so in some parts of the Africa, in Gujarat, for example, even Maharashtra, you'll find
[Guest]: black skin people of African ethnicity living today. And I work at IIM Ahmedabad,
[Guest]: and our logo actually comes from the Siddhi Saeed Jali Mosque, which is designed by these artisans
[Guest]: coming from this community. So I often tell students, actually, that, you know,
[Guest]: you have to really think twice before selling fair and lovely, because you have, you know,
[Guest]: the logo of your institute was designed originally by a descendant of a black African slave.
[Guest]: In terms of slavery on the other side, and this is a less known fact,
[Guest]: one theory of why the mountains Hindu Kush are called so low is because they were killer of
[Guest]: Hindus, in the sense, Hindu slaves being taken over the mountains, because of the cold. And so
[Guest]: there's a huge slave market also of Indians, or people, mainly Hindus, being taken over the Hindu
[Guest]: Kush to the slave markets of Persia and Central Asia. So there's a circuit from Africa and Arabia
[Guest]: coming to India, but there's also a circuit from India going into Asia. Again, even in North India,
[Guest]: slave dynasties existed. So very interesting ways in which slavery existed, of course,
[Guest]: very harsh. But I would argue compared to the US experience, or the experience of the American
[Guest]: world, a lot of avenues for upward mobility, which we've still not really found in the American world.
[Guest]: I think that's a distinctive aspect of slavery in India. Many people have been able to break,
[Guest]: it was never sacrosanct, you could always sort of rise to the top. If some accident happened,
[Amit Varma]: like Malaykambar and the slave dynasty with the mission all but but I guess those are the
[Amit Varma]: slaves that we've imported, but might be slightly harder for slaves that we export to other places.
[Guest]: Yeah, we don't know enough. Again, this is a slightly mismatch in the records.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you in fact, talk about the slogan in Central Asia, when slaves would be taken,
[Amit Varma]: the slogan being slaves from India, horses from Parthia. Yeah, something you can imagine on the
[Amit Varma]: side of a medieval billboard. And you also have a mention of in the early 17th century,
[Amit Varma]: some 18,000 Bengali slaves in two small centres of the Arakan, which is North Burma, which is
[Amit Varma]: also kind of quite fascinating. And it's the same channel of this Rohingya migration today.
[Guest]: So it's, it's interesting, because we're talking about three to four centuries back,
[Guest]: Bengali slaves being taken to Burma. And today we have a reverse sort of an issue of refugee
[Amit Varma]: trafficking on the other sort of channel. And the Rohingyas are basically the descendants
[Amit Varma]: of migrants who went from modern day Bangladesh, essentially. And then we sort of come to
[Amit Varma]: colonialism, which obviously has a bunch of different impacts. But one of the interesting
[Amit Varma]: things they try to do, which harks back to what you said about, you know, there never really being
[Amit Varma]: freedom of mobility anywhere, is that they try to cut down on migrating groups like the Banjaras
[Amit Varma]: and try to make them settle down for reasons of both surveillance and I guess, taxation, because
[Guest]: a state just wants to be an efficient state. Yeah, I mean, we think of the British, I mean,
[Guest]: if you ask, you know, did the British increase spatial mobility, or did they fall? But you
[Guest]: probably think of the railways, the steamboats, and say, obviously, people started moving more,
[Guest]: which is true. But there are a lot of, again, and this is the thing, some social groups started
[Guest]: moving more, and some social groups are moving less. And the less ones are people who are sort
[Guest]: of negatively impacted were precisely those groups who are historically always on the move.
[Guest]: These are basically the nomadic groups, and the most famous being the Banjaras,
[Guest]: famous in logistics, all different names in different parts of India. In Hyderabad,
[Guest]: you have the Banjara Hills, for example, which comes from that. And the Banjaras,
[Guest]: you know, are really affected, because one, the transport systems are being shifted. So there's
[Guest]: a technology shock. Two, there's a surveillance shock where they need to be settled down in
[Guest]: different places. And you can really see sort of, you know, communities getting poorer as a result
[Guest]: of this. So this is one way in which a lot of communities became richer, thanks to colonial
[Guest]: rule, but some communities became poor. And definitely the ones which are on the move
[Guest]: historically, definitely saw a lot of, and they're some of the poorest social groups even today,
[Guest]: in India. And I was just coming from Dadar, and the other station, the porters,
[Guest]: even today, they trace the ancestry to this group. And as I sort of write in the book,
[Guest]: it's sort of slightly ironic, because they were displaced by the railways in the first place.
[Guest]: And today, they're sort of working on the railways.
[Amit Varma]: It's going to come full circle. And it's even more ironic, because a lot of the other
[Amit Varma]: communities and castes which migrate often do it for specific purposes, they go for jobs or
[Amit Varma]: marriages or whatever. And you could say with people like the Banjaras that the journey was
[Amit Varma]: the destination they would, you know, it was part of their culture to travel and to have that taken
[Guest]: away would have been... Yeah, it was deeply traumatic. And that's why many of the revolts
[Guest]: also started coming from these social groups. Again, we don't know too much about those revolts.
[Guest]: But on the whole, there's been this mixed effect. You know, definitely some groups,
[Guest]: especially the coastal India got this massive, positive shock on movement, that is a lot of
[Guest]: people started to move, because the British connected the whole world in a major way.
[Guest]: And so this whole overseas migration started in a big way.
[Amit Varma]: Right. The second chapter of your book is called the Great Indian Migration Wave.
[Amit Varma]: And what you say about that later is a great Indian migration wave is arguably the largest
[Amit Varma]: and longest non-coerced migration stream for work in documented history, stop quote.
[Guest]: Elaborate on that a bit.
[Guest]: So when we talk migration in Indian history, it's remarkable that
[Guest]: if you ask the average person, they talk of two migrations. One is the Aryan migration hypothesis
[Guest]: many thousand years back. And then you come to the 19th century and people talk of indentured
[Guest]: migration. And that's about it. And my reason of and this is a course of contribution of this book
[Guest]: is to give a phrase to one of the world's greatest migrations. And these are migrations,
[Guest]: which are male-dominated as there are three core features, male-dominated,
[Guest]: remittance-based, semi-permanent. And they're happening pretty much even today. So, you know,
[Guest]: when you see the Ratnagiri people in Mumbai, most of them do not settle down in Mumbai,
[Guest]: they go back. And this has been happening since the middle of the 19th century. A lot of my
[Guest]: research has been to document these regions, which are these regions, go there and find out more.
[Guest]: It's remarkable, almost the entire West Coast on one side of the Western Ghats,
[Guest]: from Ratnagiri to Kanyakumari a part of this, a large part of the coastal tracts on Eastern India,
[Guest]: a whole chunk of Eastern UP, Western Bihar, Uttarakhand, pretty much all of Central India
[Guest]: and the Deccan is actually out of it. They were not really affected by it. So, this is a story
[Guest]: of mostly coastal India and the lower Indo-Gangetic belt. And what happened out here is that a lot of
[Guest]: initial recruitment took place in the colonial era, not necessarily by force. Density was very
[Guest]: high in these places. But these migrations have now led to a culture of migration, where young
[Guest]: boys grow up thinking that they will spend their lifetime outside and come back. That's also key.
[Guest]: And girls grow up knowing that they have to look after the family and land when their husbands are
[Guest]: away. And it's so strongly rooted in many parts of India. And my sort of estimate suggests that,
[Guest]: you know, these districts, if you have more than 150 districts out of about 600 districts of India,
[Guest]: which have this. Another way of saying it is there are regions covering over 200 million people,
[Guest]: which are completely remittance-based economies, principles of economy runs on money coming from
[Guest]: outside. And it has been going on since more than 140 years. So, if you compare it with other epochs,
[Guest]: this actually turns out to be the largest and longest. The largest migration right now is
[Guest]: the urbanization of China. So, China has, you know, taken hundreds of millions of people
[Guest]: out from farms to cities. But that's happened in the last 30 years. What's happened in India,
[Guest]: much smaller compared to Chinese urbanization, but it's been happening for more than 100 years.
[Guest]: So, the classic indicator for this is the sex ratio. And in India, you know, we typically,
[Guest]: sex ratios of 800, 900 females to 1000 males in some parts as well. And we're used to this
[Guest]: phenomenon of the missing women. But Ratnagiri, many districts in India have the phenomenon of
[Guest]: missing men. And in Ratnagiri, for example, sex ratio has never dipped below 1100 females to 1000
[Guest]: males. So, it's a female surplus because the men are working outside. In fact, you point out that
[Amit Varma]: this is not just true at a given point in time, but between 1872 and 2011. That's a heck of a long
[Guest]: time. It's no census has recorded it till date. And the Ratnagiri, of course, is very extreme,
[Guest]: but a very similar story, especially if you look at the age group 25 to 40. You'll find it in
[Guest]: Azamgarh, in UP, in Udupi, in South India, in Sivaganga, in Tamil Nadu. So, virtually every
[Guest]: state of India has a few districts, which have become these remittance economies. And there's
[Guest]: very strong networks, which enable these migrations to sustain. In Udupi, in fact, if between 1901 to
[Amit Varma]: 2011, it never fell below 1090 females per 1000 males. You know, in your chapter, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: a number of places and like you mentioned, Saran in Bihar, their sex ratio in 1901 had risen to
[Guest]: 1200 females per 1000 males. And if you go to the taluks and villages, it's 1400-1500. And so this
[Guest]: is, it's a massive phenomenon. What are the cultural impacts of something like this?
[Guest]: You would think that, you know, fertility reduces because the men are away, but that's not the case,
[Guest]: because as I argue, you just need one good night in order to sort of, you know, get a kid. And
[Guest]: these migrants do come back. It's not like they're away for years, they come back at least once or
[Guest]: twice a year. So it's remarkable. As a researcher, I thought fertility would be affected. But clearly,
[Guest]: you know, Bihar has very high fertility even today. We might think that women would get more
[Guest]: autonomy, in the sense that the men are away, so they'd have to take more decisions. And that is
[Guest]: true in some parts of India. But on the whole, not much has changed. What has changed on the
[Guest]: West Coast, is that with some decent governance, they've been able to use this remittances in a
[Guest]: smarter way. And you could say that migration has fundamentally transformed this region for the good.
[Guest]: In Bihar and Eastern UP, however, it's been much, much less.
[Amit Varma]: And Ratnagiri is a particularly interesting case, because, you know, a common phrase in
[Amit Varma]: Ratnagiri was, I mean, they looked at Mumbai as something really aspirational, a common phrase
[Amit Varma]: you've quoted is, Jai Chikholi Techi Mumbai, I hope I'm pronouncing it right. Mumbai belongs to
[Amit Varma]: those who own a room. And it's very interesting that a lot of the luminaries of Mumbai and indeed
[Amit Varma]: India are migrants from Ratnagiri. You say here that, you know, 10% of all awardees of the Bharat
[Amit Varma]: Ratna have been given to people directly or indirectly associated with mass migration from
[Amit Varma]: this region, like I assume, the Mangeshkars and so on.
[Guest]: Absolutely. It's a remarkable region. You know, I mean, it's, we remember,
[Guest]: as I say, Ratnagiri is famous for mangoes, but it's also famous for man goes, you know,
[Guest]: so it's this massive migration effect. Its contribution has really been truly been outsized.
[Guest]: But I mean, Ratnagiri, of course, is the Konkan is one region, but of course,
[Guest]: the many other regions of India who have also exported. And it, for example, the Udupi cluster,
[Guest]: you know, all the South Indian restaurants that you see across India, most of them are actually
[Guest]: run by the Udupi guys. And it's a remarkable story of how a guy goes, learns the sort of tricks of
[Guest]: the trade, and then starts a new restaurant. And it's just like this, literally like a
[Guest]: McDonald's franchisee model, but very indigenous, many years before McDonald's, and really spread
[Amit Varma]: its sort of tentacles across. And part of it is almost happenstance,
[Amit Varma]: isn't it? Because you mentioned that there was a flood in the region in 1923.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of people were forced to migrate because of that. And this turned out to be a natural
[Guest]: Often you have one starting shock, which starts pushing out. More recently, the diamond industry
[Guest]: got this massive shock in the 1980s. That's why a lot of the Saurashtra Patels got into this
[Guest]: business. More recently, just, you know, a lot of Bengalis are now in the sort of gold business,
[Guest]: like this goldsmith kind of business. And from literally Kochi, in the south to Surat,
[Guest]: most small towns and cities, these are a particular sort of Bengali community,
[Guest]: which is managing. And again, they had a massive sort of natural calamity in the 80s,
[Guest]: because of which many people went out. Many of these other regions also, there were a lot of
[Guest]: famines in the late 19th century. But it's almost all of India is affected by famines.
[Guest]: So it's not just the fact that there was something bad. There's a negative shock.
[Guest]: But at the same time, like you said, happenstance, where they find an opportunity. And that is the
[Guest]: combination which clicks. So while famines affected pretty much all of India, it's the
[Guest]: coastal areas, where they had the opportunity to go to Burma, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, or anywhere to
[Guest]: work, that they found this safety valve, where they realized that if there's a famine, they could
[Guest]: always go there. Whereas much of Deccan India, though there was famine, they tried to move,
[Guest]: but they couldn't, you know, get an opportunity to latch on to. And as a result of which,
[Guest]: even though they had negative shocks, they didn't sort of cultivate these migrations,
[Guest]: cultivate these migration networks, so much. Today, of course, some parts of the Deccan are
[Guest]: into migration streams, northern Karnataka, for example, and some parts of Maharashtra.
[Amit Varma]: There's something you wrote about Udupi, which kind of brings me to a larger question. What you
[Amit Varma]: wrote was, quote, migration from Udupi was unique in that it involved a considerable number of child
[Amit Varma]: migrants in search of work in the key destination, the restaurant provided free food and
[Amit Varma]: accommodation, stop quote. And my question really isn't about the child migrants,
[Amit Varma]: but that's an interesting thing in itself. But it's about how a common thread through all the
[Amit Varma]: communities and peoples that you describe in this, whether it's the Parsis, or the Sindhis,
[Amit Varma]: or the Marwaris, or the Gujaratis, all of whom we'll talk about later in this episode, but
[Amit Varma]: a common thread to all of them is the force of community as a force multiplier,
[Amit Varma]: so that if you want a better life, you just see where your community has gone. And you can be
[Amit Varma]: guaranteed that you'll go there and you'll either get a place to work and learn the trade as in the
[Amit Varma]: case of an Udupi restaurant, or in the case of say Marwaris or Gujaratis, you might even get
[Amit Varma]: funding from those community networks. And what therefore happens is that number one communities
[Amit Varma]: tend to specialize in certain kinds of trades, or vocations. And this almost then seems to have,
[Amit Varma]: in a way, a ghettoization effect, like I was chatting with a friend who was brought up in
[Amit Varma]: Surat on the show, in fact, I did an episode with Aakar Patel on Hindutva. And Aakar was brought up
[Amit Varma]: in Surat. And while he was describing Surat, we realized that Surat was both simultaneously
[Amit Varma]: globalized and ghettoized, that you had communities from across the world kind of gathering there to
[Amit Varma]: trade and to intermingle, but they were also deeply ghettoized. And it seems that that
[Amit Varma]: ghettoization or the strengthening of those community bonds is almost inevitable. It is
[Amit Varma]: as much a feature as a bug, because that's what makes it happen. How do you see the two sides of
[Guest]: this and the trade offs involved? I think the reason why communities are still so close knit
[Guest]: is because it sustains itself through marriage. And so the number one reason
[Guest]: is marriage rules. It's also linked with the age at marriage. Even today, Indian women,
[Guest]: for its sort of per capita income, marry at an extremely young age. We say, you know, 18 is a
[Guest]: legal age for women to marry. But when you look at surveys, the median age for marriages among
[Guest]: women today is 18, which means half the population of India today, even today, women marry below 18.
[Guest]: And this is the way community has its grip, you know, because if you can control marriage,
[Guest]: and if you can control marriage within your community, that's how it remains close knit.
[Guest]: The minute sort of women, for example, can work till 25, 30, and then choose their own partners,
[Guest]: if that freedom is given, then this community network breaks down. So that's the big trade
[Guest]: off. And I would, of course, argue that, you know, women should be working or should be getting
[Guest]: married by much sort of later age groups, and so on. Of course, the strange part about this is that,
[Guest]: as you said, communities work as major agents of subsidies. They subsidize accommodation,
[Guest]: food, networks, especially if you're going. And so what's interesting is some of the
[Guest]: social groups which have been not in business, or not in sort of the, you know, money making
[Guest]: activities, the way they've stormed these things is using the network, and using the community.
[Guest]: And so you'll see this in the Sarashtra Patel's move from farming to business, the Gounders in
[Guest]: South India from again, farming to business. And now slowly, some sort of what people are calling
[Guest]: as Dalit capitalism, where Dalits themselves are using the networks. And so when you have some
[Guest]: a body like the Dalit, you know, DICI, which is a Dalit industry in Chambers Commerce of India,
[Guest]: it's basically a front just as you would have a Marwadi Samaj, for example. So they've realized
[Guest]: the power of the community. And so what's interesting to me is that everyone now in
[Guest]: India is trying to come up through a community ladder.
[Amit Varma]: Which is great. But historically, as you point out, at various points in your book, it's much
[Amit Varma]: harder for someone from a lower caste to really come up because there are barriers to entry. For
[Amit Varma]: example, if you want to be in the diamond trade, you basically got to be one of the Palanpur
[Amit Varma]: regions, and so on. So what you have is that, you know, the trade at the Marwadi's control,
[Amit Varma]: or the trade at the Gujarati's control, or, you know, across those, they almost have a
[Amit Varma]: stranglehold on it, where it's very easy for someone from their community to get a step up
[Amit Varma]: and become prominent. But that kind of upward mobility within that specific trade is much
[Amit Varma]: harder for somebody from the outside. And as you correctly point out that one reason why the lower
[Amit Varma]: castes both migrated less and benefited less from migration is because they didn't have access to
[Amit Varma]: these networks. I mean, it's a good thing that they're now getting built up. And it's also a
[Amit Varma]: good thing that barriers to entry are sort of less than they were across professions.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, this is a wonderful book by Devesh Kapoor and others called, I think,
[Guest]: Define the Odds. It's basically a profile on Dalit entrepreneurs. And what they find, you know,
[Guest]: it's remarkable that when they look at commonalities of success, even more than
[Guest]: reservations or the factors, it's actually migration, the ability to go out to develop
[Guest]: new networks, and about the ability to fail, but be anonymous, which means that if you fail,
[Guest]: oftentimes you start something different, and you fail and immediately a community says, you know,
[Guest]: you're not really born to do this. There's a huge psychological setups of what you can and cannot
[Guest]: do. And migration is remarkable, because it puts you in settings in which nobody knows you,
[Guest]: and in situations where you can fail. And I think that's really the power of migration. I know
[Guest]: better person than Ambedkar, who really realized this power. And that's why Ambedkar was a huge
[Guest]: champion of migration. It helped him in his personal life. And you know, he advocated. And
[Guest]: so if you see in Dalit activist circles today, historically, these mottos of educate, agitate,
[Guest]: and so on, today migrate is also, you know, coming into that timeline. And interesting
[Guest]: international migration. So a lot of it is now, okay, now we need to go abroad and cross the
[Amit Varma]: Kalapani and sort of, you know, reclaim the space.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you point to three recent memoirs, which also underscore this Narendra Jadhav's
[Amit Varma]: Untouchables, Dayapavar's Baluta, Sujata Gidla's and Samang Elephants, which is an excellent book,
[Amit Varma]: which talk about how international or internal migration are linked with the beginning of
[Amit Varma]: social emancipation. Let's take a quick commercial break and we'll come back after.
[Unknown]: Also wanted to make a note to you all that, hey, if you are listening to us and you hear
[Unknown]: something you like, take a screenshot of what you're doing, send it to us on social media,
[Unknown]: tag us on Facebook or Twitter or Instagram or wherever, and we'll repost you on our own page.
[Unknown]: This week, your favorite fitness podcaster, Urmi Kothari, is back with season two of the
[Unknown]: Kinetic Living podcast. Urmi is doing two bite-sized episodes every week, Tabata Tuesdays,
[Unknown]: which will be a four-minute workout, and a second called Thriving Thursdays, where Urmi will share
[Unknown]: motivating personal experiences of challenges she's faced. On Cyrus Says, actor and improviser
[Unknown]: Mukul Chadha talks to Cyrus about his central role in the Indian adaptation of The Office,
[Unknown]: the process of adapting the scripts, and how he went from being a research analyst in New York
[Unknown]: to an actor and improviser in Mumbai. On the first episode of Tech Careers in the New, presented by
[Unknown]: Accenture, Sheila Ditya is in conversation with Sanjeev Narsipur. He's the managing director and
[Unknown]: blockchain lead at Accenture Technology Services, and they talk about blockchain, its real-world
[Unknown]: practical applications, and what it takes to have a career in this space. On IVM Likes,
[Unknown]: IVM staffers delve deeper into the universe of independent and parallel cinema. On The Habit
[Unknown]: Coach, Ashton talks about never missing Mondays. He also talks about maintaining the momentum and
[Unknown]: owning that habit. On ATKT Talent 10, P Man and Krupa are joined by Sai, a rapper, and Kala,
[Unknown]: a music producer and rapper. They talk about their ATKT journey, the first songs they composed and
[Unknown]: produced together, and collaborations with other rappers. On Not Just Namsak, Parzen talks to
[Unknown]: Roxanne Bambot and Maruk Mogrelia about immersive Parsi food experiences, like Parsi food walks and
[Unknown]: home dining. On What a Player, Siddharth, Mikhail, and Akash review the previous week of the ongoing
[Unknown]: ICC Cricket World Cup, preview the upcoming week, along with some unusual predictions,
[Unknown]: and give out their What a Player of the Week. On the Pragati Podcast, Pranay Kotastaneh returns
[Unknown]: to help us understand how fiscal federalism works in India. And with that, let's continue on with
[Amit Varma]: your show. Welcome back to the Scene in the Unseen. I'm chatting with Chinmay Tumbe about his
[Amit Varma]: very fine book, India Moving, A History of Migration. You know, before the break, we were
[Amit Varma]: discussing various sort of communities where the female to male ratio has gone out of whack and
[Amit Varma]: there are missing men because men cannot leave. And, and the interesting thing is, as I was going
[Amit Varma]: through the list of these communities, is that they're all sort of migrating from different
[Amit Varma]: social circumstances for different reasons. Like, you know, the whole Ratnagiri and going to Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: or Bombay as it then was is one thing with Udupi, it's kind of the restaurant trade, perhaps help
[Amit Varma]: along by the happenstance of a cyclone and other events which come together and then they're
[Amit Varma]: completely, the flood, sorry, and they're completely dominating that. And then there's
[Amit Varma]: Saran in Bihar, which is really interesting, where the sex ratio, in fact, at one point,
[Amit Varma]: rose to 1200 females with 1000 males. Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Saran, as I said, it has this really long history, starting many centuries ago,
[Guest]: and Saran is one of the few districts of India, we can trace the migration history,
[Guest]: because the three different historians who wrote about its migration for three separate centuries.
[Guest]: The first people in Singapore, for example, from the British side was the Bengal native infantry,
[Guest]: and these were soldiers recruited from Saran. And so in the 19th century, some of the major sort of
[Guest]: infantry stock was coming from Saran. And as British rule sort of consolidated, so actually
[Guest]: the demand for army personnel sort of started reducing. In fact, if you compare the Mughal
[Guest]: army and the British army, the British army is very thin. And so this whole military labor market,
[Guest]: which had developed was beginning to collapse, which means people who are on the move historically
[Guest]: had to find new vacations. And so people from Saran actually got hold of the jute mills in
[Guest]: Calcutta. And so they became just like Ratnagiri labor fueled the cotton textile industries of
[Guest]: Bombay. It was Saran labor, which sort of got hold of the jute industries. And one company, for
[Guest]: example, Saran labor from across the 20th century, I think it went from being about one fourth to
[Guest]: three fourths of the workforce. So again, a very strong network built between Saran and Calcutta.
[Guest]: The fourth district I talk about is Ganjam in Orissa. And I call it cyclone psychology,
[Guest]: because Ganjam is a very unfortunate geography. All cyclones tend to end up, you know,
[Guest]: battering Ganjam. It's faced some sort of a super cyclone once in 15 years. And so 100 years back,
[Guest]: they were going to Burma. Today, they go to Surat, Gujarat, work in a variety of, you know,
[Guest]: urban sectors. In Surat, it's the synthetic textiles and so on. But it's a culture which
[Guest]: kind of has come to the conclusion that if we just focus on agriculture, it's very risky,
[Guest]: because the super cyclone is going to come once in 10-15 years. And so migration,
[Guest]: relatively, is a very stable livelihood strategy. It can be harsh, it can be exploitative,
[Guest]: it has all the social costs of separation, loneliness. But given the realities of climate,
[Guest]: it's a very safe and I would say smart strategy that they've sort of developed over the last
[Guest]: 100 years. And in all these places, they have the money orders, they have the migration songs,
[Guest]: the folk songs. So this is a huge sort of, it's very similar. I mean, if you go to Ratnagiri,
[Guest]: if you go to Ganjam, if you go to Udupi, if you go to Saran, differences in development,
[Guest]: but that migration culture that you'll find that the kind of conversations are happening,
[Amit Varma]: it's remarkably similar. And in fact, you give an interesting statistic here that the number of
[Amit Varma]: migrants from Ganjam to Surat are more than a lakh, more than 100,000. And that's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And the point you make elsewhere in the book is that it might seem strange or counterintuitive
[Amit Varma]: that if you are, say, in a village in Odisha or wherever, you don't go to the nearest town or the
[Amit Varma]: nearest city, you go all the way to Surat. But the reason is that's where your community is. So in a
[Amit Varma]: different sense, you know, with a different kind of geography in mind, that is actually the place
[Guest]: closest to you. Absolutely. I mean, if you're in Bombay, you might think that, you know,
[Guest]: Madhya Pradesh is closer to Bombay than Uttar Pradesh. You might think that many more people
[Guest]: from Madhya Pradesh should be in Bombay than Uttar Pradesh. That's completely the reverse. UP is
[Guest]: further, but we have more. And that's because once a network starts, it is so strong because it helps
[Guest]: you find jobs, it helps you find accommodation, above all, information. Migration is all about
[Guest]: information. What information do you know about the destination place? How safe is that place?
[Guest]: A lot of you'll see a lot of migrant families diversifying nowadays. Same household, three sons,
[Guest]: two daughters, or three sons will go to three different cities. And so from a household
[Guest]: perspective, it's also like a, you know, it's like a portfolio diversification.
[Amit Varma]: You're hedging your bets. And not just sort of these places, but it's almost you talk about
[Amit Varma]: our cluster, there are these clusters and corridors all along the coast on either side,
[Amit Varma]: all the way down, and then all the way around the coast and back up again. And I particularly
[Amit Varma]: found it interesting that Goa, which is where everyone wants to go, is where there was a lot
[Guest]: of out migration, people wanted to leave Goa. Goa is India's biggest remittance economy for
[Guest]: a long time until the 1960s. And some taluks even today are remittance economies.
[Guest]: Not many people know that, you know, most people love to go to Goa,
[Guest]: but a lot of Goans actually work outside, especially in the merchant navy.
[Guest]: So when they did this migration survey, they had to actually keep an option, you know, where are
[Guest]: you outside India, they had to keep an option saying no man's land. And that was that returned
[Guest]: the most number of sort of responses. There was a Goa migration survey done and they found that
[Guest]: in taluks like Bardia Salset, about one third of the households were receiving
[Guest]: money from outside. That's pretty much the same number in Kerala or Ratnagiri,
[Guest]: that's mass migration, however you define it, where one third of households are receiving money.
[Guest]: And that's happening in Goa today. And the survey was done about six years back.
[Guest]: But of course, not all of Goa today. So Goa is today an aberration on the west coast from
[Guest]: Kanyakumari to Ratnagiri, some parts of Goa. And that's because, of course, a lot of the population
[Guest]: permanently left after this Portuguese separation to Portugal, Mozambique.
[Guest]: But a lot of Goans also started developing new things, because it became, it faces massive
[Guest]: tourism boom. And so a lot of construction activities started happening in Goa, etc.
[Guest]: Vizag is another place where a lot of people used to leave, they build the port,
[Guest]: and they start more migration towards Vizag rather than from it.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there was a, you know, very nice little tidbit in your book about how
[Amit Varma]: Goan Catholics became so good at baking, that that's how they got the name Makapau.
[Guest]: Apparently, that's the, you know, moniker that they got. It's a story, many of these stories,
[Guest]: it's very hard to verify. But apparently, this is considered to be the source of the word
[Guest]: Makapau that we use and, you know, in Bandra and Khar, it is full of this particular population.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And Kerala also has been obviously very famously an area from which there's been a
[Amit Varma]: lot of out migration. But, you know, we should probably, for listeners who may not be completely
[Amit Varma]: clear about this, maybe clarify the terms. What's the difference between emigration,
[Amit Varma]: immigration and migration?
[Guest]: Yeah, emigration, in today's context is out of country. So people leaving India going outside.
[Guest]: Immigration is people coming in into India, for example, Nepalese or Bangladeshis coming to India
[Guest]: or Mexicans going to US, so they're called Mexican immigrants in the US. And we say
[Guest]: migrants or internal migrants for, you know, people within the country. You might ask who is
[Guest]: a migrant? In the census, there are two options. You can be a migrant based on the place of birth,
[Guest]: which means if I'm born in Pune, and I'm living on the day the census officer arrives in Bombay
[Guest]: for more than six months, six months is the cut off, then I'm a migrant on the base of place of
[Guest]: birth. But you'll see that suppose I was in Pune, and I moved to Bombay, spent 10 years,
[Guest]: and I went back to Pune. And if the census officer asked me in Pune, you know, what's
[Guest]: your place of birth? I say Pune, and I'm in Pune, then I would be not a migrant. So in order to
[Guest]: capture moves, they ask you a question, what is your last place of residence? And so in that case,
[Guest]: technically, you should be saying Bombay. As it turns out, there are a lot of biases
[Guest]: in migration surveys. And Kerala is a classic example. When the census and the National
[Guest]: Sample Survey asks, you know, question, what is your previous place of residence? Now, we know
[Guest]: almost a third of the workforce of Kerala has a Gulf connection. But surprisingly, very few people
[Guest]: answers saying that their last place of residence was the Gulf, because for them home is Kerala.
[Guest]: As a result, in the census and the National Sample Survey, we find very few, you would conclude that
[Guest]: there's very little Gulf connection. There's another survey done by a research center there,
[Guest]: a large sample size, and just a very specific question. Have you gone to the Gulf? And how
[Guest]: many years you spend there? It turns out one third of the population has a Gulf connection.
[Guest]: So it matters as to how you ask the question, and how a person relates to a particular place.
[Amit Varma]: There's a big gulf between this kind of question. Yeah, so Kerala has always again, as you point
[Amit Varma]: out, you know, been incredibly open to outside influences. You know, their maritime trade has
[Amit Varma]: been flourishing for a long time. That's probably where Islam and Christianity first came to India
[Amit Varma]: from. And now they are known for their high rates of out migration. Is it sort of a question of
[Guest]: cultural openness to? It could be I mean, the fact that they've, you know, had this coastal culture
[Guest]: for centuries, definitely is part of the story. But this out migration started in a big way,
[Guest]: partly also because they got, they're one of the most highly educated states of India,
[Guest]: even the early 20th century, within India, relatively the most educated, and it's a position
[Guest]: they've had till date. But it's a case of a highly educated state with less job opportunities. And so
[Guest]: you've seen a lot of educated young people leave Kerala, both men and women, and go all across
[Guest]: India first. And then in the last 30 years, the Gulf and then US and variety of places.
[Guest]: Interestingly, the Gulf story starts with Mumbai, the first recruitment offices of the oil companies
[Guest]: were in Mumbai in the 1930s and 40s. And interestingly, they had some norms as to who
[Guest]: they could recruit. And so it was the Keralites in Mumbai who got those jobs. And that's how the
[Guest]: network started. And so from Mumbai, the locus shifted to Kerala. And that's why you have,
[Guest]: you know, this massive Kerala when the Gulf started booming in the 70s and 80s, when oil
[Guest]: prices boomed, construction activity started, and this Kerala connection was formed. And so today,
[Guest]: in popular culture in Kerala, you know, massive, massive migration from Kerala. Of course, now
[Guest]: there's a lot of migration to Kerala as well, because Kerala is fairly rich, they don't want
[Guest]: to do the low end jobs. And so you have the curious case of more than 2 million North Indians
[Guest]: now working in Kerala. And there's just a Malayali movie just released where
[Guest]: the film sort of breaks into a song. And the song is sung in Bengali.
[Guest]: Bengali song in a Malayali film.
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty wild. Later in your chapter on the Great Indian Migration Wave, you sum it up by
[Amit Varma]: saying, quote, The Great Indian Migration Wave has for the most part been voluntary in nature.
[Amit Varma]: It represents an adventure, the ability to break out of the family's gaze and yet
[Amit Varma]: be able to support it, to enjoy the city lights and the company of friends and relatives,
[Amit Varma]: and finally to return home with the satisfaction of a life well spent,
[Amit Varma]: at least in the eyes of the others. For many, though, this would not have been the case as
[Amit Varma]: life would have cruel twists in store, stop quote. And you're obviously referring here to
[Amit Varma]: indentured labor, which was a significant factor in out migration of Indians all across the world.
[Guest]: Yeah, in the 19th century, definitely. As I said, it's, some have called it a new form of slavery.
[Guest]: I don't use that word. I think a lot of people strategically chose indenture as a way to get out.
[Guest]: But there's no doubt that they were harsh contracts, however you see it. One way to see
[Guest]: it is when, you know, Gandhi and the national movement, one of the first sticking points for
[Guest]: them was the indentured migration, and they got it banned, they got it abolished in the 1910s.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing is when they got indentured as a system abolished, but the
[Guest]: migration didn't stop. People continue to move, they switch destinations, but they start, they
[Guest]: continue. So the pressure to migrate was always there. Apart from indenture, of course, it's
[Guest]: exploitation on a day to day basis, people eviction, you know, insecure sort of land rights,
[Guest]: as a result of which migrants in India, they lead fairly insecure lives. That is why this
[Guest]: connection with the home is so important, because they know that they can always fall back
[Guest]: on something. And so they never really snap the connection with the rural place, even if
[Guest]: an entire family has moved. For example, my father's side family comes from Udupi. And it's
[Guest]: the rare Udupi family which actually settled in Mumbai. I mean, of course, there are lots,
[Guest]: hundreds and thousands of Udupi families which have settled in Mumbai. But I would argue that's
[Guest]: the minority, most actually go back. And the minute you settle down, the kids get education.
[Guest]: And over some time generations, the route with Udupi itself snaps. For example, today, I really
[Guest]: don't go to Udupi, you know, every now and then, but there's a closer connection with previous
[Amit Varma]: generations. You know, writing of indentured labor, for example, you're right to quote between
[Amit Varma]: 1831 and 1920, 2 million people were transported across continents through indenture contracts,
[Amit Varma]: one third towards the Caribbean, one fourth towards Mauritius, a 10 towards South Africa,
[Amit Varma]: and the rest scattered at numerous islands and regions, including Fiji, Cuba, Peru and Hawaii,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And the interesting thing is that a lot of these places are now, you know, heavily
[Amit Varma]: populated with Indians, like I think more than half of Mauritians are Indians and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in British Guyana, French Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, they've kind of huge settled down
[Guest]: everywhere. Even the political, I mean, in Mauritius, for example,
[Guest]: Ujjpuri is still a language, you know, it's a language alive. Every, you know, Mauritius
[Guest]: major political leader has had some sort of an Indian ethnic route. And it's not surprising that
[Guest]: when you come to India, they have to make a stop to Bihar, because most of these migrants to
[Guest]: Mauritius and the Caribbean, they trace their roots to the Indo-Gangetic plains. V.S. Naipaul
[Guest]: himself, you know, wrote these books and his heritage also comes from that part of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of ironic that all of these sort of descendants of people who migrated from Bihar and
[Amit Varma]: so on are now doing much better than their so called, you know, their fifth cousins or the
[Guest]: sixth cousins or whatever. Yeah, I mean, that's a very good observation. And it is true,
[Guest]: related to Bihar, but there's a huge diversity. So Mauritius is spectacular. It's got a per capita
[Guest]: income many, many times India, many, many times Bihar. But there are also places like in the
[Guest]: Caribbean, which are not that great. There's Guyana, for example, which is still, you know,
[Guest]: fairly poor. There's Fiji, where Indians have not been treated well, and is also fairly poor.
[Guest]: So I think the experience has sort of varied. But it would be a mistake to say that, you know,
[Guest]: hence they made the right choice. I think it's not fair to judge the legacy, but rather the choice
[Guest]: they made at that particular time. For example, you might even say that, you know, it's good
[Guest]: slavery happened in the transatlantic world, because the African Americans in the US are
[Guest]: better off than Africans. But I think that would be a bit harsh on the whole process of slavery.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, the significant thing about that observation, for example, is what it tells you
[Guest]: is that there's not something inherent in the people, which stops them from developing or
[Guest]: progress. Given the right institutions, climate, you will flourish. And Indians have been very
[Amit Varma]: successful abroad. Exactly. Then we come to sort of two of the major impetuses towards
[Amit Varma]: progress. The first of them being the railways. Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I mean, started in this, you know, city, the first line, 1853,
[Guest]: completely transformed the speed of transport, completely. Some say it really unified India,
[Guest]: massive role in migration, because, you know, people started moving. It's on the cover of the
[Guest]: book as well. I did a lot of my research, interviewing people in the general compartment
[Guest]: ends, that's pretty much where migrant India moves off trains. So train is a very special symbol of
[Guest]: migration, India, both voluntary migration on a day to day basis, but also involuntary migration,
[Guest]: like the partition, where you have these death trains, Khushwant Singh's famous train to Pakistan,
[Guest]: for example. So from, you know, life, death, and as I like to say, even love, so many people have
[Guest]: found partners and trains, like my parents who first met in a Bombay local train. So this train
[Guest]: is just a unique metaphor for various things in Indian life, but especially migration.
[Amit Varma]: And the second institution, which you describe as a post office.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I'll give that it's been even more important. You know, travel happened through
[Guest]: railways, but travel happened before the railways. And even after the railways came,
[Guest]: most people from Ratnagiri, Kerala were coming to Bombay by steamers. So there was also water
[Guest]: transport. But the one thing migrant workers used everywhere was the postal money order. And the
[Guest]: postal money order was remarkable, because it's the first mass financial instrument, which everyone
[Guest]: could relate to. India had a unique system. In 1884, they realized it was launched in 1880. Four
[Guest]: years later, they realized that most of the recipients were women, they were not coming to
[Guest]: the offices to collect the cash. So they changed the system to make it home delivery of cash.
[Guest]: And as a system, a unique system only in India, which survived until it was shut down,
[Guest]: the entire system was shut down a few years ago. And so for more than 100 years, you had
[Guest]: a system of home delivery of cash. And that's why the postman became this symbol in many parts of
[Guest]: India, of like this Messiah, because he would come, he would undo his bag, and there'd be money,
[Guest]: there'd be physical cash out there. And so there are songs on this variety of, you know, theatrical
[Guest]: incidences based on this particular character. And I spent a lot of my time actually digging out
[Guest]: information, old postal cards on this, because it also shows you that this remittance economy
[Guest]: in India is not new. It's been there now for more than 100 years in many parts of India.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, you point out that, you know, postal money order traffic grew so much that it amounted
[Amit Varma]: to two to 3% of the gross domestic product between 1900 and the 1960s, which is a heck
[Amit Varma]: of a lot. And there are young millennials today who will not know what their postman looks like,
[Amit Varma]: or they will not know what a money order is. Absolutely. Yeah.
[Guest]: But they will see a Western Union board, which is the proxy for that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Yeah. Let's talk about gender a bit now. Because, you know, one of the things that is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, obvious is that many of these regions from which out migration is happening,
[Amit Varma]: the gender balance is skewed because the women stay at home. And you've spoken a bit about how
[Amit Varma]: this affects the social and cultural impacts of this. But it is also true that there were a lot
[Amit Varma]: of women who were sort of migrating and not always for the most welcome reasons. You know, you've got
[Amit Varma]: a section here on trafficking and female flight and all of that. And there's a very telling quote,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which seems to indicate how people were forced to because of circumstances,
[Amit Varma]: look upon the children as resources. And your sentence sort of is, quote, in one official
[Amit Varma]: record in the late 19th century, a cultivator's girl was made to swap with a prostitutes boy,
[Amit Varma]: because apparently neither was of any use to their natural parents, top quote, which is very poignant.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. This book has also been a revelation to me, because in terms of research,
[Guest]: I found remarkable sort of cases and instances just on which makes you think about, you know,
[Guest]: how India has been as a society. And we know that India has not really been the best place for women.
[Guest]: And especially for migration, you know, when we think of harsh forms of migration,
[Guest]: women have been disproportionately been affected. Prostitution being massive.
[Guest]: I write in the book, I mean, it's not just Indian women, but European women who were
[Guest]: trafficked into India, because you had this huge British standing army, almost completely men.
[Guest]: And, you know, they had their own sexual needs. And so that's why there's this
[Guest]: importation of white women as required. So the devdasi form, people have said is also
[Guest]: a very harsh form of servitude. So varieties of, you know, problems related with female migration.
[Guest]: And even when women are highly educated, when they go to, for example, to the US,
[Guest]: it's, I argue, a sort of brain drain, where, you know, highly educated going, but you're not getting
[Guest]: work because you're not allowed to. Because most of the times, it's the men who have the, you know,
[Guest]: visa, the H1B, and the women have the H4 visa, or the L2. It's very tough to get work,
[Guest]: because there are laws which restrict you from doing so. And so, as I say,
[Guest]: they inevitably become these desperate housewives in the US.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even in these modern times, you have sort of women bearing the brunt of that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of, you know, move from the migration of labour to the migration of capital. And you
[Amit Varma]: talk about how that becomes a force for a lot of migration, for example, the Parsis.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there's this famous myth about how the first Parsi merchant comes and the king of
[Amit Varma]: Gujarat, Jadhi Rana, tells him, why should I let you in? And he asked for a glass of milk,
[Amit Varma]: and he put some sugar in it to indicate that, you know, they'll assimilate, but not overwhelm.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a it's a very nice, you know, quote. And it tells you also how the community has
[Guest]: gelled very well in India, it still maintains a strong identity, you know, but it's, it's,
[Guest]: it's a small community, it's dwindling in size. But again, its contributions have been outsized.
[Guest]: You know, you look at virtually any sector, and Parsis have made just tremendous contributions.
[Guest]: The one sector in which they've always sort of blasted against was that they'd never contribute
[Guest]: to the army. And then you have a guy like Sam Manekshaw. So even that has been saturated.
[Guest]: So tremendously outside. And I think it boils down to a way of sort of a culture of excellence,
[Guest]: which built into whatever occupation you take at a very young age. And Bombay, of course,
[Guest]: it helped that they were in Bombay, which most cosmopolitan city of India. And so they got the
[Guest]: best, you know, exposure to different things that were happening in the city. And so they leverage
[Guest]: whether it was arts, whether it was business, you know, you have these pioneers in these,
[Guest]: even women, Parsi women have been trailblazers in law, like Kurnila Swarabji, variety of fields.
[Guest]: So it is a tremendous community. But we should also not forget that, like many mercantile
[Guest]: communities, the wealth really started with the opium trade. And, you know, whether it's the
[Guest]: almost, I mean, this is not just the Parsis, practically every community in China and India
[Guest]: owed their wealth in the 19th century to the opium trade, which was basically narcotics,
[Amit Varma]: including the Tata's. Here one could argue everything in a sense is the opium trade.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think and I'm just thinking aloud here, since you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: Parsis tend to, for whatever reasons, strive towards excellence, you know, just as people
[Amit Varma]: talk of, say, the Protestant work ethic being a factor in how Europe did whatever they did,
[Amit Varma]: would you say that in many of the communities, which you describe separately, where you talk
[Amit Varma]: about the Sindhis, Gujaratis, Marwaris, and so on, and the Parsis, that each of them, can you
[Amit Varma]: pinpoint at the risk of generalizing, but are there sort of these cultural qualities which
[Amit Varma]: carry through and therefore become a prominent part in the success of later generations? Like
[Amit Varma]: you could say, okay, the Marwaris are good at trading and doing deals and whatever, all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm usually very hesitant to give culturalist explanations to practically everything
[Guest]: that might reflect the economics training. Economists in general do not like culturalist
[Guest]: explanations. But there's no doubt that if you look at the Marwaris, for example, risk taking
[Guest]: appetite, competitiveness, it's tremendous. So there's definitely something in the community,
[Guest]: which, but I would say it's a network effect. You know, there's some there's, like in migration,
[Guest]: something starts it and then there's this massive corridor, which gets generated.
[Guest]: I think it's a very, very similar thing. So it's not got to do with Marwaris per se,
[Guest]: you might have social groups, completely non-business like, who might be doing the
[Guest]: same in two decades. But they need that one role model or one, you know, massive star to be born.
[Guest]: And everyone become like that. And you've seen that you see that in football, where you see
[Guest]: certain African countries become very good in football, because they see these role models
[Guest]: performing very well in Europe. And so I would boil it down to some strong early role models.
[Guest]: And of course, in the world of business, capital matters. And so if capital is retained within a
[Guest]: community, then everyone sort of, you know, benefits. Yeah. And a lot of people with sort
[Amit Varma]: of a North Indian bias may not kind of realize that one of the really significant communities
[Amit Varma]: in this aspect in India, the Chettiyars from Chettinad in South India, at one point,
[Amit Varma]: you write quote, at the peak of the power in the 1930s, estimates suggest that the Chettiyars had
[Amit Varma]: 1650 firms in Burma, 1000 each in Malaysia and Singapore, 500 in Sri Lanka, 200 in French in
[Amit Varma]: Indochina, which is Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, and 150 in other East Asian regions, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: and that's quite mind blowing. And people don't at least, you know, maybe it's my Amit bias,
[Amit Varma]: but people don't often think of them in these terms.
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, Chettiyars were by far the richest community in India. Again,
[Guest]: like the Parsis numbering just about 100,000. So it's not a very big community. These firms,
[Guest]: of course, small firms, but still, as you can imagine, just a sheer number,
[Guest]: most of them in money lending, but then also in timber, and then start plantations.
[Guest]: So really a very widespread transnational community at the early 20th century. And it's a
[Guest]: remarkable case of decline, actually, over the 20th century, because they lose all their money
[Guest]: in Burma. And sort of they really fall down. But if you go to Chettinad, even today, you'll see
[Guest]: these houses, like if you go to, you know, parts of, close to Pilani in Rajasthan, where you see
[Guest]: these Marwadi havelis of old style havelis. In Chettinad, you have these Burmese teakwood houses,
[Guest]: even today, which is a reminder of this Burmese connection. Even today, there's a Burma
[Guest]: investors group in of the Chettiyars. And they stake claim to land in Burma even today, they feel
[Guest]: they were unfairly knocked out of Burma, which they're never going to get, but they've not yet
[Amit Varma]: lost hope. So, you know, reading about many of these, one of the things that is common between
[Amit Varma]: these groups that were responsible for the migration of capital, whether it's the Khatri's
[Amit Varma]: who were money lenders, or whether it's the Marwari's, in fact, in 1844, the Bombay Times and
[Amit Varma]: Journal of Commerce, which is now the Times of India, for whom I write a column, ran a brief
[Amit Varma]: piece called Beware of the Marwari's. And I want to quote from that, and the quote is in your book.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, these Marwari's leave their own country for the purpose of trading and they are spread
[Amit Varma]: all over Hindustan. A Marwari's shop may be seen as a hamlet, may be seen in a hamlet consisting
[Amit Varma]: of only four or five cottages. In fact, were you to search all Hindustan, it would be difficult
[Amit Varma]: to find an agricultural village without a Marwari. When they arrive here, they commence by selling
[Amit Varma]: gram. And in the course of four or five years, they become opulent bankers. The causes of this
[Amit Varma]: are they unjust dealings. Therefore, my advice to my countrymen is this, that they avoid entering
[Amit Varma]: into any transactions of this nature with such deceivers as these. Stop, quote, and fall. My
[Amit Varma]: Marwari listeners, these are not my words. I was quoting from the Times of India. And this takes
[Amit Varma]: us back to a sort of this very suspicious outlook towards trade. Again, you quote from the Arthashastra,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, 1800 years old, which also refers to traders as, quote, all thieves in effect,
[Amit Varma]: if not name. And stop, quote, and then says, quote, they shall be prevented from oppressing
[Amit Varma]: the people. So a lot of these migrants were fundamentally both traders and moneylenders,
[Guest]: professions looked upon with suspicion. If you see, you know, after 1991, with this liberalisation,
[Guest]: economic boom, a lot of people have kind of wrongly concluded that India has always been
[Guest]: open to trade and so on. And I would argue that yes, but in only a few communities. Actually,
[Guest]: the default, like the notion of Arthashastra, was this healthy scepticism towards trade,
[Guest]: you can almost call it like this, you know, a culture where salvation is more important than
[Guest]: making money. And you find that in many communities even today. And hence, when a lot of communities
[Guest]: in India started making a lot of serious money in the 19th century, especially the Marwadis,
[Guest]: there was a lot of opposition. And it's important because today when we see anti-immigrant
[Guest]: sort of, you know, views and whether it's in the US or UK, or even in India, it's labour migration,
[Guest]: you know, whether it's in the North East India or US, it's anti-labour migration. But there are
[Guest]: also cases in history where there's anti-capital migration. And the classic example is Marwadi
[Guest]: migration in India. And in the Bengali nationalist PCRA called them parasites. The Chettiyars were
[Guest]: also abused and thrown out. Most famously in East Africa, Idi Amin kicked out, you know,
[Guest]: kicked out, you know, Indian traders. And what's interesting is, it's not sustainable,
[Guest]: because in any region, you need some capital to grow with. And so whether it's East Africa,
[Guest]: who are actually wooing back the Indians who they kicked out 30 years back, they're actually
[Guest]: wooing them back to Kenya and Uganda today. And in the case of Times of India, of course,
[Guest]: the ownership, you know, moved on to Marwadi hands 100 years later,
[Amit Varma]: which is the ultimate revenge, take that bitch. And, you know, speaking of the Gujaratis getting
[Amit Varma]: kicked out of East Africa, you know, 50,000 partidars get kicked out of East Africa, a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of them go to the UK. And you've got a very nice anecdote about how, quote, in one local cricket
[Amit Varma]: match in Bradford in 2001, all 21 players on the field were Patels. The scorekeeper himself,
[Amit Varma]: a Patel, had the fairly amusing job of recording a scoreboard on the lines of Patel, caught Patel,
[Amit Varma]: Patel, bowl Patel, Patel, run out Patel, and so on. It's a remarkable cricket match.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, let's let's kind of move on to another significant section of your book, which is about
[Amit Varma]: the diaspora, which is about not the sort of internal migration, but the diasporas that have
[Amit Varma]: formed. And you say that today, there's a vast Indian diaspora of over 25 million people across
[Amit Varma]: the world. Tell me a little bit about this, because one of the crucial points you also make
[Amit Varma]: is that these diasporas reside both within and outside India and the diaspora within India is
[Guest]: double the size of the international diaspora. Yeah, this is actually not well known. For
[Guest]: example, the number of people who speak Bengali, there are more people speaking Bengali within
[Guest]: India, outside Bengali heartland than outside. Like me. Yeah, you wouldn't have thought I was
[Guest]: Bengali, right? And this is also a surprise for me, except the Malayalis, I think. The Malayalis
[Guest]: have this massive international diaspora. But it was most Indian linguistic groups have a larger
[Guest]: internal diaspora. And this is important because often the internal diasporas, firstly, what is a
[Guest]: diaspora? A diaspora is basically a scattering of a particular, you know, identity, whether it's a
[Guest]: language or ethnicity, or religion. And if you see the global diaspora is about 25 million,
[Guest]: internal diaspora, linguistic, I say it's about 60 million. And the internal diaspora is like a
[Guest]: launchpad for the international diaspora. Often, like we said, you know, the Biharis who are now
[Guest]: going to the Gulf, are going via Kerala, through networks cultivated in Kerala, the Gujaratis who
[Guest]: went outside, Bombay was a major launchpad, for example. So this is this matters, you know, these
[Guest]: these small sort of connections matter. The international diaspora is varied, it's so diverse,
[Guest]: you have the old diaspora, that you can call it the plantation diaspora. So they were mainly sugar
[Guest]: plantations. But there's rubber plantations, tea plantations, coffee plantations, and these are the
[Guest]: guys who went to Mauritius, Fiji, and so on. And in a lot of those countries, Indian ethnic Indians
[Guest]: now make up more than half the population. The new diaspora can be summarized as a U-turn,
[Guest]: U meaning three U's. So that's US, UK, UAE. And these three countries specifically, you know,
[Guest]: today attract a lot of Indians, a lot of investment, a lot of overseas investment,
[Guest]: a lot of remittances comes from those places. And today, India, you know, earlier, they've also
[Guest]: concerns of brain drain, and so on. Today, nobody talks so much. And the fundamental reason is India
[Guest]: is today the world's largest recipient of international remittances, and you get more
[Guest]: than $70 billion from people outside. It's about two to 3% of India's GDP. I mean, it's a huge part
[Guest]: of the balance of payments. Without it, India would really be struggling. So we've kind of
[Guest]: recognized the contribution of migrants from coming from outside. And a lot of this money
[Guest]: comes from Gulf, which is on, you know, which also has a lot of low skilled labor. A lot of it comes
[Guest]: from the US, which is at the high skilled labor. Today's diaspora, however, slightly different from
[Guest]: the old diaspora, because it is much more elite, in the sense the guys who are going out are
[Guest]: disproportionately drawn from the upper castes. Religion wise, it's different, because in the
[Guest]: Gulf, there's an over-representation of Muslims, in the US, over-representation of Hindus. But
[Guest]: caste wise, there's this massive Gulf, which was not the case 100 years back, because it was almost
[Guest]: like a cross section of an Indian village would be found on a boat going to Fiji. But today,
[Guest]: when you see the plain, it's not really a cross section of Indian society. So it's much more elite.
[Guest]: And in the US, like the political scientists, Devish Kapoor and others have called it the other
[Guest]: 1%. It's really an extremely elite diaspora. So when we say, you know, Indians are so brainy, or
[Guest]: a classic comment I get is, you know, Indians are very good at mathematics, and they're looking at
[Amit Varma]: Indians in the US. But this is really the top end. You know, it's not just a selection bias,
[Amit Varma]: it's what you call the triple selection bias. And which is why Indian Americans outperform every
[Amit Varma]: subgroup in America in terms of income and education, as you write here. But it's not
[Amit Varma]: just the three U's, it's also Southeast Asia, which is often ignored, isn't it, when it comes
[Guest]: to looking at the diaspora? I mean, if you look at the whole arc, Burma, Malaysia, Sri Lanka,
[Guest]: this was the hub 100 years back. Burma and Sri Lanka have fallen out. But Malaysia, Singapore,
[Guest]: especially are still very strong. So today, I mean, outside the three U's, Singapore definitely
[Guest]: is a huge hub for Indians, a lot of Indian entrepreneurs, businessmen. And it's here,
[Guest]: when you talk of diaspora, inevitably, we start talking about the Sindhis. Because the Sindhis
[Guest]: are a group which have become so transnational. I mean, virtually every country, Gujaratis and
[Guest]: Punjabis, I would say, Sindhis, Punjabis, and Gujaratis are most transnational. And then the
[Guest]: Malayalis and Tamils, of course, Karnataka is to a slightly less extent. What's interesting is
[Guest]: Bengali diaspora, of course, we add Bangladesh, it's very wide. But the sort of more recent sort
[Guest]: of migrations have been more internal. That is, you know, from West Bengal to different parts of
[Guest]: India. But again, what's not changed is that Central India, this whole arc of the Deccan
[Guest]: Plateau, and Northeast India, like 100 years back, they are really not into this international
[Guest]: migration in a big way. Why do you think that is? It's again, these historic networks, I would argue
[Guest]: that. So less opportunity, therefore, basically, more like, yeah, the coasts have had sort of
[Guest]: starting advantage, because they've had these old ties. And so they've just been synced with it.
[Guest]: Because remember, the British Empire worked from three ports. Delhi came much later. It was Bombay,
[Guest]: Chennai, Calcutta. So the coastal sort of India had much wider exposure to trade ideas, movement
[Guest]: for international sort of connections than the hinterland. So there's this clear bias towards
[Guest]: the coast rather than the hinterland. In sort of independent India, apart from Delhi, and now much
[Guest]: more recently, Pune, Hyderabad, Bangalore. But apart from that, there's a huge part in the center,
[Guest]: which is kind of been sort of ignored. And with migration, you need information. And so it's only
[Guest]: now that the information is percolating. And so who knows, in maybe 20 years down the line, you'll
[Amit Varma]: find a lot of migration from these places. In 2006, I traveled through Pakistan, I was covering
[Amit Varma]: India's cricket tour there. So I was there for a couple of months. And one of the things that sort
[Amit Varma]: of struck me is that wherever I went, people's sense of community identity was seemed stronger
[Amit Varma]: to me than their sense of being Pakistani. So for example, with my friends in Lahore,
[Amit Varma]: it would be the Punjabi identity was really strong, much more than the sense of the idea of
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan. And at that point, it seemed to me and this was probably a shallow observation, but the
[Amit Varma]: idea of Pakistan seemed weaker at that level than the idea of India. But reading your book, one thing
[Amit Varma]: I thought was that, you know, if you look at the histories of these communities, and the way they've
[Amit Varma]: kind of stuck together through the centuries, and they have these sort of tides, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: lift an entire community along, or, you know, you actually have communities, small communities
[Amit Varma]: getting, you know, displaced en masse, as it were, very often, that it even seems that the idea of
[Amit Varma]: nation, especially India, which is just over 70 years old, seems relatively nebulous to the idea
[Amit Varma]: of community. So, you know, much as I absolutely deplore identity politics, for example, I can
[Amit Varma]: also see why people naturally gravitate towards it. Absolutely. I mean, the central theme of a
[Guest]: person growing up in India, I mean, is implicitly that, and explicitly that you need to be within
[Guest]: your fold, right? I mean, that's so strongly ingrained into who you eat with, who you live
[Guest]: with, spatial segregation, and eventually who you marry with. And these norms, I mean, of course,
[Guest]: they're breaking down, but very slowly, right? And so, as a result of which, this community logic
[Guest]: is very strong. Now, Raghuram Rajan has a new book, you know, called The Third Pillar. And he
[Guest]: argues that one of the reasons for this kind of stuff you're seeing around the world today is that
[Guest]: between markets and the state, there's also the community, and the community has been ignored.
[Guest]: And that's, I think that's a very interesting observation that he's making. And maybe in India,
[Guest]: I would argue that, of course, the communities have always been at the forefront, you know,
[Guest]: whether it's for reservation or political thing, specific communities have always been able to
[Guest]: galvanize. And so it's a very core part of the political process now. I mean, you could say that,
[Guest]: you know, it just simply works on community blocks.
[Amit Varma]: And then what are the sort of trade offs involved there? Because on one hand,
[Amit Varma]: the advantage of being part of a community is that you of course, have a sense of belonging,
[Amit Varma]: and you have a sense of home, not necessarily just in a geographical sense. And you also have
[Amit Varma]: access to all these networks, and these people will take care of you and so on. But the flip
[Amit Varma]: side of it is that can also be divisive, though, I mean, I would argue, if you look at India's
[Amit Varma]: history, it hasn't necessarily been divisive. You have so many communities sort of coexisting
[Amit Varma]: and intermingling to mutual benefit, but it can be divisive. And especially in these times where
[Amit Varma]: our politics becomes more and more polarized and divisive. How do you see these sort of trade
[Guest]: offs playing out? Yeah, it's a very good question. I don't have any clear sort of, you know, answer
[Guest]: to that. I just feel like my experience has been when you talk to different friends, right? So
[Guest]: if I talk to friends coming from the Dalit backgrounds, when I talk about community with
[Guest]: them, the experience is much more of, you know, what are you talking about? This is basically
[Guest]: exploitation. You can call it caste community for us, it is exploitation. I think one has to be
[Guest]: very sensitive to that. Whereas you talk with several other groups who have been more privileged.
[Guest]: And like we discussed, you know, they're often seen as the outsiders, they now have a grouse
[Guest]: that people are out to get us, right? For example, the Brahmins have this classic grouse that we were
[Guest]: forced to move because of reservations, you know, there's this huge identity around that. So I think
[Guest]: these are the sort of different tensions in which each community is facing. Some, which justifiably
[Guest]: have been exploited for long, and some which now feel that they're being exploited, even though
[Guest]: there might not be any evidence on that. So in a strange way, every community feels that they're
[Guest]: being exploited. It's a very unique situation that we are in now.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder if, you know, some of these resentments between communities or between
[Amit Varma]: peoples and so on also comes from a kind of forced migration, which you describe in the second half
[Amit Varma]: of your book, which is all the displacements which have happened because of partition,
[Amit Varma]: for example, being a very big reason and not just one partition of 1947. But the multiple
[Amit Varma]: partitions you sort of point out, you know, the Bangladesh in 71, the Burma just before that,
[Amit Varma]: and all the displacements, for example, in 1990, the Kashmiri pundits being forced to flee.
[Amit Varma]: Another striking statistic in your book is about how two thirds of the people in Delhi
[Amit Varma]: are in some way migrants, especially in 1951.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And do you think that lingers on through the generations? Like if you look at some of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of support for say, Hindutva forces today, would you say that some of it comes from memories
[Amit Varma]: and resentments, and therefore are not all that hard to understand?
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, if you look at Kashmiri pundits, it's very obvious, you know, where the
[Guest]: grouse is coming from. It was a painful incident. It was a horrendous incident, this whole Kashmiri
[Guest]: pundit exodus. But fundamentally, it's the same reasons. It's hyper nationalism in Kashmir at
[Guest]: that point. It's hyper masculinity, aggression. And unfortunately, this is being repeated now
[Guest]: in different ways in India. Partition, you're absolutely right. For example,
[Guest]: the RSS would say that, you know, it is us who actually protected people at that point of time.
[Guest]: So, you know, a similar thing in Bombay. A lot of people love the Shiv Sena because they say,
[Guest]: you know, in the 90s, during the riots, it's the Shiv Sena who stood up and protected us.
[Guest]: And so this becomes a very solid part of the identity building process. And so
[Guest]: there's a clear connection. I mean, Sindhis, for example, very, very closely aligned with
[Guest]: hardcore nationalist feelings. There's also the case in the case of Sindhis of trying to prove
[Guest]: themselves that they are Hindu in a very, very strong way. And so this kind of seems to dominate
[Guest]: a lot of the logic because a lot of people, because they're often being taunted as being
[Guest]: coming from the other side. And so in order to sort of dismiss any notion of that, it kind of
[Guest]: go to the other extreme and say, no, no, no, we are, you know, you need to assert your identity
[Guest]: even more. So I do think some of it comes apart in that way. I don't know if there's any empirical
[Guest]: relation, like on average to Sindhis, you know, are they more nationalist than others? I don't
[Guest]: know. But I can clearly see the reason why. And there's no, for example, Kashmir Pandya,
[Guest]: it's very clear cut. It's a solid injustice which has been done against them. It's still not really
[Guest]: been solved. It's still outside. And so this sort of resentment will obviously continue.
[Amit Varma]: And another question too, I guess none of us will have an answer. And I don't know if you can
[Amit Varma]: get metrics for that either is that as the generations pass and the memories of the forced
[Amit Varma]: migration sort of grow dimmer, are you likely to see some kind of softening? And if not, does that
[Amit Varma]: indicate that apart from the event, the resentments come from something more primal and tribal or
[Guest]: whatever? Yeah, it's a good question. I have no clear answer, you know, for that. The cases we
[Guest]: have in India, for example, the Parsis, the Baghdadi Jews, it's too long. I mean, we're
[Guest]: talking many, many centuries. The more recent ones like the Tibetan refugees, whether internally
[Guest]: displaced or even damned displaced projects. It's too recent. So I think it's kind of caught up
[Guest]: in between having persecuted communities in India who have come very far and who have assimilated
[Guest]: very well. And sort of groups which are much more recent and who are in the first or second generation.
[Guest]: And maybe it's too early to tell. Maybe we know 50 years down the line how these groups are doing.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the major points you make is that a lot of the forced migrations are not just because of
[Amit Varma]: partitions or politics are also because of development projects where people are building
[Guest]: dams and people... It's huge. The numbers are astonishing. As per one report. I mean, clearly
[Guest]: more people have been displaced because of development induced projects cumulatively
[Guest]: than all the partitions put together. The three partitions that I see in 1937, 47, 71,
[Guest]: which is a crazy statistic, if you think about it, because partition was massive. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: you have the images of the strains moving... Seven and a half million people. Absolutely.
[Guest]: The Bangladeshi refugee crisis, 71, 10 million refugees in eight months.
[Guest]: Districts having more refugees than the population of the district themselves.
[Guest]: Short term though. And we're seeing cumulatively more than 40 million people have been displaced
[Guest]: internally. So, and these are small displacements. This could be happening outside your house,
[Guest]: a small busty being, you know, sent forcibly demolished and people are on the streets tomorrow.
[Guest]: But when you actually count this across the country, it's quite a staggering number.
[Guest]: And so for me, what's interesting is that often, for example, the Tibetan refugees,
[Guest]: we've been more hospitable, or we've extended more privileges and rights to international
[Guest]: refugees, because we've been under the scanner, than our own internally displaced,
[Guest]: which is some sort of a sort of irony.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. So it's also indicative of how these are normalized. Like you'd imagine 40 million people
[Amit Varma]: and you know, we are a democracy, there would be some kind of movement around this, there would be
[Guest]: a cry and so on. Yeah, but the 40 million is aggregation of many small ones. So we don't really
[Amit Varma]: see it. Yeah, and they don't talk to each other. And it's just, oh, this is just my bad luck.
[Guest]: Some of the dam incidents that I sort of read about were insane. I mean,
[Guest]: some of them were literally flushed out. I mean, just one fine day, the water comes and you know,
[Guest]: you're forced to leave. I think in Andhra Pradesh, you mentioned the government got
[Guest]: confused about when the displacement would be finished. What is the timing of the flow of the
[Guest]: water? Now, there's, of course, no doubt that a lot of these dams have also worked. There's
[Guest]: good that's come out. But then you'd have to say that, you know, what has been, there has to be a
[Guest]: way of, you know, I think it's been only very recent that this principle of rehabilitation
[Guest]: has been enshrined. Earlier, you could pretty much do what you wanted. Some of the first big
[Guest]: dams of India, unfortunately, we don't know what, you know, how they went about acquiring land or
[Guest]: how they went about submerging. But clearly, there was no process, which means even if you take them,
[Guest]: if these numbers will also increase, if you go before independence, if you start considering the
[Guest]: really big dams in South India, for example, built in the early 20th century, celebrated today,
[Guest]: but they must have submerged massive, massive amounts of land.
[Amit Varma]: No, I have very little sympathy for sort of cost benefit analysis of this sort of thing,
[Amit Varma]: because the cost is normally on one section of people disproportionately the poor and the benefit
[Guest]: is somewhere. And we usually don't get the electricity, don't get the water.
[Amit Varma]: The moral and humanitarian cost is huge to begin with. And then, you know, why would you
[Amit Varma]: sort of look at benefits? You know, there are a lot of little things in your book,
[Amit Varma]: which I wanted to talk about, but I've taken up a lot of your time. So I'll kind of go to
[Amit Varma]: the bigger questions at the end. One of the very interesting contrasts you make about
[Amit Varma]: attitudes towards migrations is the attitudes of Ambedkar, Gandhi, and Thackeray. Can you
[Guest]: tell me a little bit more about that? Yeah, Thackeray comes across as this
[Guest]: staunch nativist. Of course, he's a brilliant strategist. So he used opportunities for,
[Guest]: you know, talking about migration. But like Trump, like any staunch nativist,
[Guest]: basically saying your people first, immigrants are something to be looked against,
[Guest]: often even attacked. You know, Shiv Sainik also attacked people on this issue.
[Guest]: And it's sporadic, you know, I mean, in the sense that the violence is sporadic,
[Guest]: but the basic ideology is that our people first. And when you think of cities as sites,
[Guest]: it's strange, because Mumbai, for example, it's a city built by migrants for migrants,
[Guest]: even today, about 60% of the population is migrant. Thackeray himself was a migrant.
[Guest]: Thackeray himself was a migrant. And Thackeray's surname, for example,
[Guest]: is anglicized. And, you know, he's got this... William Makepeace Bal Thackeray.
[Guest]: Exactly. So, so it's and now his movie is being played by, you know,
[Guest]: Nawazuddin. A Muslim migrant from UP. It just doesn't
[Guest]: get more bizarre or ironic than... In fact, when you were growing up,
[Amit Varma]: did you ever feel victimized by his tirades? Because you're from UDP, right? And you were
[Guest]: in Mumbai. Yeah, so we have an interesting family story to this. Our surname, for example,
[Guest]: is direct sort of fallout of this. We used to live in Shivaji Park. And I believe family,
[Guest]: friends, I was not, of course, there at that time. But these are stories passed on in the family.
[Guest]: And we used to, apparently, our building was neighboring Thackeray. So as you're all
[Guest]: very cordial relations. And obviously, I mean, he was a very nice guy on a personal basis. So,
[Guest]: you know, nobody had hard feelings against that. But in this whole anti South Indian movement in
[Guest]: the 1960s, eventually, we actually had to rather strategically changed our surname.
[Guest]: And we took this name Tumbe, because it sounds Maharashtrian. And so Tumbe, because there's a
[Guest]: Tembe and a Tambe. But we're the only Tumbes in the world. You are literally the only Tumbe.
[Guest]: Google it. There's nobody else. I will go on Facebook.
[Guest]: And, yeah, so this is a remarkable story that thanks to the Thackerays, you know,
[Guest]: we sort of changed our surname. And it's because he's got our surname changed. I mean, this,
[Guest]: of course, in jest, because he didn't have a direct connection. The city's name has changed,
[Guest]: but his surname has not. So yeah. And tell me also then a bit about...
[Guest]: And I should say Tumbe is the name of a village in Udupi.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Oh, right. Tell me also a bit about, you know, given that urbanization is basically a
[Amit Varma]: process of migration. Tell me a bit about Ambedkar and Gandhi's views on contrasting
[Amit Varma]: views on urbanization. Like you've quoted Ambedkar famously is calling the Indian village,
[Amit Varma]: quote, a sink of localism, a den of ignorance, narrow mindedness and communalism,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And Gandhi, perhaps inspired by Ruskin and Tolstoy and all those guys sort of
[Amit Varma]: deified the village. And in fact, he seemed to I mean, if you read Hind Swaraj, for example, I had
[Amit Varma]: a couple of episodes on Gandhi with Ram Guha where we discuss this almost seems to be against so much
[Amit Varma]: of modernity, like railways, like doctors and whatever. But Gandhi's approach to urbanization
[Amit Varma]: was sort of a complete contrast. And you've sort of very nicely exposed the counterplay between
[Guest]: these three approaches. Yeah. Gandhi himself was a migrant. I don't think he had a opposition to
[Guest]: migrants. And as I mentioned, he's on record saying that if people are being oppressed,
[Guest]: then they should move. So he doesn't have a really problem with that. But I think his ultimate
[Guest]: disdain for cities came about because I think he was more in sync with the village life. And also,
[Guest]: I think at heart, he had this idea of being an environmentalist. I mean, he's not called
[Guest]: an environmentalist then, but I think it's the harmony. And even today, you'll find this
[Guest]: return to this idea of environmentalism that, you know, this rural life is much more,
[Guest]: is less polluting, etc. In the book, I make my position very clear that I take the Ambedkarite
[Guest]: view that India needs more urbanization, not less. More people have to move to cities.
[Guest]: And ultimately, it's coming from Ambedkar's perspective. Because if you look at caste-wise
[Guest]: urbanization, you know, people, if you look at social groups as these small concentric circles,
[Guest]: it's the well-off have these wide spatial networks, their concentric circles span the world.
[Guest]: And the social groups where these concentric circles just span a few villages. And if India
[Guest]: really has to flourish, one, these concentric circles have to start interacting, but they also
[Guest]: have to start widening. And that's what migration brings about. And so what India really needs is
[Guest]: more rural to urban migration, of course, of the safe kind, not exploitative, and so on.
[Guest]: But to have a blanket policy saying, you know, we should have reverse migration, or let's...
[Guest]: And the other thing is, I think what people have failed in this Gandhian world of rural development
[Guest]: is the basic flaw in the ideology that is rural development almost always gets more,
[Guest]: gets you more migration. That is, as people get rich in rural areas, they actually leave.
[Guest]: And you've seen this in coastal Andhra, where people became very rich,
[Guest]: high productivity, and they start moving to Hyderabad, US, because as you get richer,
[Guest]: you're not going to farm work, you're not going to do backbeating from, it's a basic.
[Amit Varma]: And you want to be part of larger economic networks.
[Guest]: Absolutely. So I'm not against rural development, obviously. But my sort of view is that with rural
[Guest]: development, you will get more migration. And that should not be seen as a failure of what
[Guest]: you're trying to do, but just as an inevitable part of a sort of development. And you see it in
[Guest]: China, it's got tremendous benefits, people moving from villages to cities. And, you know,
[Guest]: you're seeing it in India, it's still very slow in India, compared to in China, because as I say,
[Guest]: in this book, the great Indian migration wave means people also go back. So it's not that
[Guest]: people are coming and setting in Indian cities, a lot of them spend their life here, but they go
[Guest]: back. So India, in a way, has an inbuilt check on permanent migration. I argue mostly it's coming
[Guest]: from the source region, women are moving less. Some of it is also housing, high exorbitant costs,
[Guest]: people can never really put a foot in the city. So these three views of the nativist, of the
[Guest]: completely sort of celebratory account of migration, safe migration, which is Ambedkar,
[Guest]: and Gandhi in the middle where he loves the idea of, you know, ideas moving about,
[Guest]: or even people moving about. But fundamentally, the focus is always on the village. And if possible,
[Guest]: there should be no cities, everyone should be living in the village. And Ambedkar would never
[Guest]: support that. And the three positions are, for me, very fascinating. And for Ambedkar, of course,
[Guest]: the crux of this was caste in the sense that if you move to the city, you would sort of weaken
[Guest]: your caste in it. Now, it's a good question to ask, has caste really disappeared once you move
[Guest]: to the city? And I don't think so. But I would argue it's less. I think that that's the whole
[Amit Varma]: point. When you talk about urbanization, it's not a panacea for anything. There's no magic pill.
[Amit Varma]: But as you point out in your book, if you're travelling on the crowded Virar local, you don't
[Guest]: have time to see what the caste of the guy next to you is. It is relatively less. And there's a
[Guest]: lot of evidence now suggests that the anonymity, it helps our entrepreneurship, it has a variety
[Guest]: of things. So overall, this this romantic idea, which policymakers in India have had for a long
[Guest]: time, that is, you know, if we do enough in rural areas, people won't have to move.
[Guest]: have to move, is fundamentally flawed. In fact, if you do enough in rural areas,
[Guest]: people will still move. And the rural areas will also then consolidate into urban areas.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Yeah. And which is happening, you know, you see these small townships and so on
[Amit Varma]: emerging. Right. You know, one of the very interesting things that you say in your book,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of seems obvious now in the light of current events, but if you told me this 15 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, it would have seemed very counterintuitive. And I would have said no way, which is that just
[Amit Varma]: as you point out the major ideological battle of the 20th century was between capitalism and
[Amit Varma]: communism, your sense is that in the 21st century is likely to be between cosmopolitanism and
[Amit Varma]: nativism, which we see playing out all around us, but is nevertheless still a little surprising to
[Amit Varma]: me, because you'd imagine that as we become more urbanized and cosmopolitan and globalized,
[Amit Varma]: there'll be less chance for nativism to rear its ugly head.
[Guest]: Actually, I mean, this is not completely new. I think I mean, I use that sentence,
[Guest]: just because in the 20th century, capitalism can be very strong. But you did for a brief
[Guest]: moment in the early 20th century, also have this battle between nativism and cosmopolitanism. For
[Guest]: example, after the Great Depression, or actually after the First World War, there were these
[Guest]: massive racist visa walls that emerged, blocking off, you know, migration flows in Europe and US.
[Guest]: So this is not the first time, and there have been people like Trump before. But because this
[Guest]: economic ideological battle is pretty much done and dusted with, there might be new ones which
[Guest]: might emerge in the century. And because we have this massive backlash against globalization,
[Guest]: remember, it's more backlash against globalization of people. There is, of course,
[Guest]: the trade war and the capital flow war. But between the movement of people, goods and money,
[Guest]: or capital, political sort of position is towards the first, slightly less against the second.
[Guest]: And on capital, nobody's talking about stopping capital flows. Everyone loves that. But it's
[Guest]: the people which people have a problem against. And so, you know, I mean, this is a battle that's
[Guest]: going to really rage on. And we've seen it in all the elections across the world. In India,
[Guest]: where immigration is such a huge issue, it was never a political issue for a central election.
[Guest]: This time, you know, it also mattered to some extent. And so I argue that, of course,
[Guest]: there's a bias. I myself happened to be born in Mumbai, cosmopolitan city of India, maybe Asia.
[Guest]: But I in this book is a celebratory account of cosmopolitan. It's a defense of that.
[Guest]: We benefit from ideas transferring. Some of these ideas may not be good, but, you know,
[Guest]: you might even have counter ideas coming from these exchange flows. And I think history serves
[Guest]: as a nice reminder that especially for social groups to rise, migration is very important.
[Guest]: And if not for any other reason, I think that's one of the reasons why one should support mobility.
[Amit Varma]: Towards the end of your book, you start off by saying that there are at least three major
[Amit Varma]: developments that you foresee in the 21st century. Tell me about them.
[Guest]: So the first, of course, is the North to South migration. This has started in bits,
[Guest]: but it's going to increase. And the reason is because the earlier linguistic barrier,
[Guest]: Hindi speakers trying to learn South Indian language is kind of broken,
[Guest]: partly because now the wage difference is so high that people don't mind learning these languages.
[Guest]: And so you're finding, you know, Bhojpuri Bengali speakers who are learning Tamil or learning Malayalam
[Guest]: or who are working without these languages because they're desperate for good wages
[Guest]: and they're getting very good wages. The added benefit being that the South has better labor laws.
[Guest]: So they're actually also getting better labor protection than working in say, Gujarat or Maharashtra.
[Amit Varma]: It's practically the opposite of Hindi imposition.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. So they're getting a good deal by migration. Now, you might get a backlash.
[Guest]: So you have like you have this, the Kannada Rakshika Vedic in Bangalore. Until now,
[Guest]: you've not seen any political movements against migrants, thankfully. But this is definitely a
[Guest]: feature. And so the great Indian migration wave, which I argue went East 19th century, West 20th
[Guest]: century, is now going South. Then there's a point of climate, climate change. And you're seeing
[Guest]: crazy temperature variations. It's going to affect agriculture. Historically, migration has obviously
[Guest]: been linked. Even the Arthashastra has a mention of what kingdoms should do in terms of famine,
[Guest]: move the kingdom to another place and so on. So that's, you know, very climate change, especially
[Guest]: because the flooding, you know, if the sea levels rise and so on, Bangladesh is a low-lying place.
[Guest]: And so that's like a, you know, huge hotspot of migration. And third is, of course, also
[Guest]: expats, you know, of international immigrants coming into India. And so far, we've had Nepalis
[Guest]: and Bangladeshis in large numbers. But with India growing, you'll also see immigrants coming from
[Guest]: Europe and US. You see that in a few cities, but it's still in the few thousands. And this could
[Guest]: dramatically grow up in 2050. You might find, you know, walking down the street in Bombay,
[Guest]: and you might find literally a lot of races, which you're not seeing today. In a way, it would be a
[Guest]: in a way, it would be a return to the late 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe Thackeray's descendants could meet other Thackeray's.
[Guest]: Yeah, you never know. They could also marry outside. You'll have a transnational family.
[Guest]: Yeah, you never know. But Bombay was so cosmopolitan. When you read Bombay's history,
[Guest]: late 19th century, you had communities from across the world in Bombay. And you could probably see
[Amit Varma]: that again in the next 50 years.
[Amit Varma]: Makes me feel even better about living in and loving the city.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: One final question. Did the process of writing this book change how you look at India?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I've always loved this place because it just,
[Guest]: I mean, it's cliched. But it is true that it's just so beautifully diverse. And
[Guest]: we just learn something every day. I think Ram Gowar said that, you know, this is
[Guest]: the most fascinating country, something like that. And I completely agree. And I have had
[Guest]: the opportunity to travel a fair bit in the world. And every time you travel in India,
[Guest]: it's just something new that, you know, opens up. Writing history, especially for a general audience,
[Guest]: has been really fun and also a real eye opener. Because there are many aspects of history where,
[Guest]: you know, I also had certain preconceived notions. And when I sort of dug in more,
[Guest]: I realized, okay, hang on, you know, need to sort of look at this in a very, very different way.
[Guest]: So yes, I think it's been a very fun process overall. And don't ask me if I'm writing
[Amit Varma]: another book. Are you writing another book? Hopefully, but yeah, it'll take some time.
[Guest]: Chinmay, thanks so much for coming on the scene. Thanks so much for having me over.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do hop on over to your nearest online or offline bookstore
[Amit Varma]: and pick up India Moving by Chinmay Tumbe. You can follow Chinmay on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Chinmay Tumbe, one word. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse
[Amit Varma]: past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research in education and public policy. Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public
[Amit Varma]: policy, technology policy and strategic studies for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: We've had guests like Anjali Raina, Dr. Marcus Rani, Dr. Swati Lodha,
[Unknown]: Ambi Parmeswaran, Apoorva Damani and many more on our show paperback. Find new episodes every
[Unknown]: Wednesday on ivmpodcast app, website or wherever you listen to podcasts.
[Unknown]: And IP man, chat with some immensely talented college students about the fun part of college,
[Unknown]: like fresher's life, the music and poetry scene, side hustles for college students.
[Unknown]: And the not so fun, like weird dress codes, hostile deadlines and ragging.
[Unknown]: New episodes every Tuesday on the ivmpodcast app, the ivmpodcast website and wherever else
[Unknown]: you get your podcasts from. Hey Kripa, check out my poetry. Roses are red, violets are blue.